The Project Gutenberg eBook of Poetry and the Drama, by Frederic
Hebbel

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Poetry and the Drama
       Three Plays by Frederic Hebbel

Author: Frederic Hebbel

Editor: Ernest Rhys

Release Date: July 13, 2023 [eBook #71187]

Language: English

Credits: David Clarke, Krista Zaleski and the Online Distributed
         Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
         produced from images generously made available by The Internet
         Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POETRY AND THE DRAMA ***



    Everyman, I will go with thee, and be thy guide,
    In thy most need to go by thy side.

    This is No. 694 of Everyman’s Library. A
    list of authors and their works in this series
    will be found at the end of this volume. The
    publishers will be pleased to send freely to all
    applicants a separate, annotated list of the
    Library.

                       J. M. DENT & SONS LIMITED
                   10-13 BEDFORD STREET LONDON W.C.2

                        E. P. DUTTON & CO. INC.
                         286-302 FOURTH AVENUE
                               NEW YORK




                          EVERYMAN’S LIBRARY
                         EDITED BY ERNEST RHYS


                          POETRY & THE DRAMA


                              THREE PLAYS
                   BY FREDERIC HEBBEL · INTRODUCTION
                            BY L. H. ALLEN




    FREDERIC CHRISTIAN HEBBEL, born in 1813 in
    Schleswig-Holstein, in humble circumstances.
    After travelling about Europe he settled in
    Vienna in 1846. He died there in 1863.




    THREE PLAYS

    [Illustration]

    FREDERIC HEBBEL


    LONDON: J. M. DENT & SONS LTD.
    NEW YORK: E. P. DUTTON & CO. INC.

    _All rights reserved_

    _Made in Great Britain_
    _at The Temple Press Letchworth_
    _and decorated by Eric Ravilious_
    _for_

    _J. M. Dent & Sons Ltd_.

    _Aldine House Bedford St. London_

    _Toronto  ·  Vancouver_

    _Melbourne ·  Wellington_

    _First Published in this Edition 1914_




INTRODUCTION


If a stringent quality be noticeable in Hebbel, it can well be traced
to his early environment. The greater ills which strike the manhood
into human nature are drastic godsends; but the long draw of poverty,
the depressing atmosphere of dour faces, the helpless baffle of young
and ignorant art “made tongue-tied with authority”--it is these things
that in a sensitive nature are prone to twist strength into rancour.
Luckily this was not the effect on Hebbel, but in the caustic, if
honest, introspection, the rigid or hesitant self-examinings, the
loathing of poverty and uncongenial work that was almost a panic,
in these things whose excess tends to stunt the energy, the bane of
Hebbel’s early years is seen. Nothing more can be said for his great
stature than that through all his miseries he won his way to a mature
confidence and mellow resignation.

He was born in 1813, a Dittmarscher, the son of a mason. There is
in that sea-coast blood something of an ancient savagery, a kinship
with grey skies and seas, yet a power under strong control. To this
he owed his sharp directness of speech, and to his peasanthood a raw
facing of unvarnished things that was to stand him in good stead in
his future war on faddists and dilettanti. Yet these resultant goods
helped little in his early strife. A snapper-up of unconsidered trifles
in education, destined by his father for masonry, at fourteen a petty
clerk “set to feed with grooms,” derided by his master for crude
effusions in the local weekly, and no doubt soundly trounced for a
malcontent cub, suffering this for twenty-two years, the sensitive
young thinker might well have wondered which was out of joint, himself
or the time. It was not till a Hamburg authoress, Amelia Schoppe,
struck by his writing, invited him to Hamburg, that his restricted
nature began to expand--yet under difficulties. His patroness advised
him to make a crutch of law and a walking-stick of poetry, to which
end she made him the pensioner of a well-intentioned clique. It was a
gigantic task for an ill-equipped boy to make up the yawning gaps in
systematic education: it was worse to bury himself in constitutional
niceties; and, most unkindest cut, to eat the bread of dependence. The
Northern stubbornness bristled at this last; and it was intolerable to
be admitted as a favoured guest into a banal society where literature
was pasteurised. There he ruffled some honest brows by boldly affirming
that Kleist was superior to Körner.

Even thus young he was bound to speak his mind, and it is precisely
those minds that take boldness as an unavoidable pang which suffer
under introspection. Truth to oneself is good in the sanctum, but
awkward in the parlour, expulsion from which sets one, in his drifting
loneliness, grasping at the first straw. Thus it was that Hebbel sought
a doubtful balm in the love of Elise Lensing.

She seems to have been one of those pliant natures that cannot
live without an idol. Tender, affectionate, brave, but no mental
stimulus--there is the tragedy. A German is essentially a thinker. His
inner world is the camera obscura for the outer, with this consequence,
that a woman is to him intellectually nothing at all. Hebbel, to whom
intellect was vital, in the weak hour when that intellect itself was
in question, sought refuge in emotional fellowship--not love; he did
not pretend it. For some years he tried, no doubt with that agony of
hesitation endured by Shelley, to act up to his sense of chivalry. But
“self-consciousness” and “self-development” are the besetting virtues
of the German. The homely housewife could not hold him, that portrayer
of strong characters felt integral necessity for some positive,
dominant quality of soul that could share his own expansion.

This, however, is anticipating. The gallant Elise, self-sacrificial
to the point of becoming mother without being wife, for some years
devoted her help, pecuniary if not intellectual, to furthering her
lover’s, or rather her beloved’s, success. From 1836-1839 he studied
in Heidelberg and Munich, ostensibly law, though extracting far more
from history and philosophy. Always at daggers drawn with poverty,
eking out his Brötchen and Kaffee with little appreciated journalism,
he felt he was now against stark issues. Here his Northern nature was
his ally. When against verities he was indomitable; and henceforth the
question--“Shall I write from the inner or the outer necessity?” could
receive only one answer.

From his travels he gained little. His Germanism needed no
accentuation, and his desultory studies had tended to make him an
introspective browser. His angularity and bitterness, together with his
imperious cry for individualism, came out now in the _Judith_. It was a
harum-scarum crudity, yet marked with strange flashes of genius. Judith
was to be the forerunner of such an imperial type as Mariamne; but one
cannot help feeling the pig-tail beneath the helmet of righteousness;
and the gigantesque Holofernes, though he roar like a Bull of Bashan,
is apt to give the impression that Judith after all cut off a property
head. Many Germans appear to admire this play, but it seems to less
Teutonic eyes like an aimless piston. Certainly we are not marching in
the fields of Thrasymene, and the reader will not be disappointed if he
wants Marlowe’s luridness out-Marlowed. Yet withal there is something
craggy and storm-enduring amid the ferocity, and one realises that real
anguish is revealing itself by intermittent lightnings.

Fretted by penury and hope deferred, Hebbel now conceived a wild
design. The Duke of Holstein, his own duchy, was Christian VIII of
Denmark. On such a man he had a claim and could be proud as well as
suppliant. To Denmark he went, at first with little success. The
prospect of a chair of Aesthetics at Kiel opened only to close. He now
felt in extremities, when the Danish poet Oehlenschlager gave him a
timely appreciation and recommended him to the King: with the result
that he received a meagre viaticum for two years’ travel.

“Thus we half-men struggle,” says Browning. But the whole men struggle
more. It is their misfortune to be world-useful in one thing,
world-useless in all others. In them their art is not a choice but a
condition of existence, without giving the means of existence. What
then this pittance meant to one who for two years was relieved of
the necessity of earning a livelihood, only men like himself can
realise. Not an opening of great avenues; they always stretch to the
imagination; but an end to stolen moments in them, the coming of
delightful hauntings of them, and the steady concentration on some
mastering thought.

To Hebbel it meant more, in that he chose Paris for a great part of his
stay. Its grey atmospheres and meditative buildings, its blue skies,
and above all, its childlike unrestraint were an admirable corrective
to the long constriction of necessity and the Teutonic _Grübelei_.
In Paris no two clocks agree. In Germany they are fatally accurate.
There is the difference in a nutshell. The best good that might befall
Hebbel at this period was to forget to wind up his watch. His warm
words about Paris and his regretful departure thence showed that the
Teuton had loved the geniality of the Frank. Yet, strange to say, at
this period he produced _Maria Magdalena_--yet not strange to say; for
like Lucretius’ gazer at the storm from land, Hebbel could write of
the bitter peasant-life with a relief, for the nonce at least, that
it was over. Perhaps, too, the death of his little son Mark, whereby
his stay in Paris was threatened, gave his thoughts a gloomy caste.
At all events it would be hard to find a more unrelieved atmosphere
of misery than in this play--not that subtle Ibsenesque clutch of
Fate, but a hard realism whose lines are burnt in with acid. Unwilling
to follow out the regulation sorrows of peasant-maidens and noble
seducers, Hebbel keeps this tragedy of the _bourgeoisie_ entirely in
its own atmosphere. This, his express aim, was good in itself, for
the gallant noble has too often been made an example of gaudy and
melodramatic sin. It is more powerful to show that a pusillanimous
clerk’s sordid love-affair involves tragic issues. The more closely to
knit this tragedy to its own atmosphere, the ruin of the girl has been
set against the problem of paternal authority. The effect of terror
is worked less by the self-slain daughter than by the still living
father, who has in him a sort of stupid grandeur, one whose ideas
the blacksmith traditions of his class had cast in iron. With a son
mismanaged and a daughter dead through these metallic good intentions,
he cries dazedly, “I understand the world no longer!” It is the
terrible “I want the sun!” given in more manful tones, for with all
his obtuseness, he has in him the Roman solemnity of a father’s powers
and duties.

The drama was published, but refused by the Berliner Hoftheater, and
indeed it now looked as if his retrospect were to become forecast. With
the _Maria Magdalena_ was published an essay on the then conditions of
the drama, a treatise that made him determined enemies. This fruitless
toil for the time embittered him, but his money was not yet exhausted
and he went to prolong his dreams in Rome, where the acquaintance with
several men of high talent did much to deepen him.

In 1845 he was ready to return to Germany; but during his sojourn
abroad the slow shadows of his love-crisis had been creeping on him.
Two years of uninterrupted thought had brought an expansion of mind
incalculable to one who lived in the intellectual. He was now grown up,
conscious of power, and alas, Elise was not grown up. Now she called to
him, unable to bear the separation longer; and thereby he was placed
in the necessity of decision. No palterer with himself, he refused
compromise. He was to choose between an absorber of and a compeer
in his ideals. There is no need for harrowing psychology. He chose
the latter; let those who blame him acknowledge at least his truth
to himself. Let this be said--in later years when Elise had lost her
second child, he invited her to his house and made her acquainted with
his wife, at whose instance the invitation came. “You have not borne
children!” she cried when he hesitated, and in those words she revealed
the sympathy which made her so great an actress. Between these two
women there grew up a warm friendship--a thing impossible if somewhere
in all this there was not a noble element. Let us rather accept it in
the spirit of _Aglavaine and Selysette_, than with the rigid sneer of
Arnold at Shelley for proposing the same thing to Harriet. These were
the words which Elise could afterwards write to Hebbel’s wife--“That
our relations could take so pure a colour I ascribe to my sojourn
there (Vienna). Though so many hours of bitterness were my lot in that
unforgettable town, things would never have shaped themselves thus had
I not learned to know you and all the facts on the spot itself. Our
bond is now one of those of whose like there are few.”

It was from Vienna that Hebbel sent Elise his decision, and the
variegated Southern capital was to be his home till his death. In 1846
he met Christine Enghausen, an actress of power and a warm admirer
of his work. In this woman of feminine devotion and deep insight he
found one who could foster his art as well as his nature. From their
marriage began sweeter days for him. Her own earnings at the theatre
relieved his immediate want; and it speaks the more for the proud man
that he could take what was freely given with no sense of dependence.
More than ever now he needed domestic happiness, for his relations with
the Viennese were not of the best. He did not sympathise with their
revolution or fall in with their polished manners. His own laconisms
were hardly complimentary or attractive, and his strong Northern accent
ruffled Southern ears. But with a noble wife at his side he could
afford to be shut in on himself. It meant a grip on his thought-world
and an absence of corrosive compromise. At this time there appeared
_Julia_, _The Ruby_, and _A Tragedy in Sicily_. They show that for
the time at least his equilibrium was upset by his estrangement from
the outer world. It is hardly a reflection on contemporary taste that
_Julia_ was unappreciated. Berlin declared that it did not suit the
public; Vienna had doubts as to its moral and aesthetic value. Any new
and good art meets these objections, yet there are cases where they
apply. It has a fantastic plot which finds a halting solution. Moral
it is, as Hebbel sharply pointed out, but the “problem” is hardly
thinkable, the motives are bizarre, and the turgid language betrays a
straining mind. If no other point be taken, a comparison between the
grim father in this play and that of _Maria Magdalena_ will show that
here he has substituted the remarkable for the terrible.

In _The Ruby_ he essayed humour, a quality he lacked. The servants,
for instance, in _Herod and Mariamne_, and the Persian in _Gyges_,
make elephantine fun which depends rather on verbal antitheses
than on genuine situation. In _The Ruby_ he missed the fascinating
topsy-turvydom of the fairy tale; and there is a certain oriental
nonchalance of the wonderful which was quite outside his province.

These plays, however, were followed by _Herod and Mariamne_, which
left no doubt as to his genius, and proved that he had now found the
power of creation in his own atmosphere. As has been said, there
was now an increasing happiness in his domestic affairs, and the
acquisition of a little property gave him the possessor’s pride in
tending a garden. But in exterior things a crash came in his fortunes.
In 1849 Laube took over the management of the Vienna Hofburgtheater.
His personal dislike of Hebbel reflected itself on his wife. He
seems to have been quite unconvinced of Hebbel’s dramatic genius and
augured for him no lasting position. Certain of his plays had met
with poor success and on this ground Laube cut out of the theatre
programme _Judith_ and _Maria Magdalena_, nor did he notice the
dramas between 1850 and 1860. His position was frankly that a good
drama should vindicate itself within two or three years from its
first performance--a principle that means the condemnation of Hebbel.
Yet even thus his injustice to Christine is not excused. “As far as
concerns my wife,” Hebbel writes, “Laube deprived her of her best
rôles and did not give her a single new one. Indeed he forced her to
play grandmothers and nurses. It is an attempt at moral murder, for an
artist who must let her powers lie unused wears herself out consciously
or unconsciously, and naturally loses in the process.”

For Hebbel it seemed an _impasse_, but at this juncture Dingelstedt of
Munich came to his rescue by performing _Judith_ and _Agnes Bernauer_.
In the latter, however, political faction in Munich found offence,
alleging reflections on Bavarian royalty. When, therefore, the drama
was forbidden, Dingelstedt seceded to Weimar, bringing out Hebbel’s
_Genoveva_ in 1858, and in 1861 his _Nibelungen_ triology.

It meant the poet’s final triumph. The Court of Weimar, anxious to
maintain its cultural traditions, and keen enough to recognise a man
of genius, offered him residence among the memories of Goethe and
Schiller, and the last year of his life (1863) was crowned by the
bestowal of the position of Privat-Bibliothekar to the Grand Duke of
Sachs-Weimar.

The offer of residence at Weimar he refused, being now no longer young
and thoroughly habilitated at Vienna. He had outlived any mad quest
of fame, had reached an inner assurance, and could rest content with
the knowledge that his work would be his monument. Spending his last
days in quiet reading, and meditating on the philosophy of Kant, he met
his last illness prepared and happy. His wife survived him many years,
and is indeed but recently dead. Her earlier bitterness was sweetened
by the assurance of the increasing regard for her husband throughout
Germany.

The personality of the man was almost a penalty paid to his art. He was
no lover of strife for its own sake, not rancoured against individuals,
no conscious doctrinaire in conversation, and brief of speech. Yet he
had so forceful a conviction that it was difficult for him to make
lasting friends. Without his own will he so impressed others with
his decisive habit of mind, an effect heightened by his short and
penetrating speech, that independent, if lesser, minds felt they must
avoid him for their own salvation. He was German to the core, and the
best qualities of his nation are a profundity and strength that is good
for our craggy moods. The elusive subtlety of the Frenchman is not his,
but Siegfrieds are not made of the rarer lights and shadows. So eminent
in these qualities is Hebbel that Germany is now asking if she has not
in him her greatest poet since Goethe.

This is a question that cannot be answered hurriedly, but at least it
may be said that no poetic dramatist since Goethe expressed so deep or
consistent a conviction about art. The creator in him only stimulated
the critic, and his various treatises show that his dramas have
been built on deep foundations. Two things most impressed him about
humanity, first the individual will, secondly the relation of the unit
to the whole. Tragedies arise not from the direction of the will, as
Christianity would have it, but from the will itself, the “obstinate
extension of the individuality.” Deed and circumstance are the outward
expressions of will and necessity, and it is primarily with these
outward expressions that drama has to do. Through these dynamic means
it interprets the static abstraction, and though the comprehension
of the latter is the main end of drama, yet it must work within its
own limits. It is this mingling of Being with Becoming that makes the
artist problem difficult.

Hebbel thus recognised art as symbolic, but unlike the symbolists he
made the character himself the symbol. The tragic figure, at once the
instrument and agent, is his own problem. When Dr. Heiberg, adversely
criticising Hebbel, announced that the drama of the future would
subordinate the character to the problem, Hebbel trenchantly condemned
the prophecy. Out of Heiberg’s own country arose Ibsen to vindicate
the poet. It is the decline from Ibsen’s art that has emasculated his
followers. The Shaws and Galsworthys create their characters out of
their problems. It will make no drama, as Hebbel foresaw. Treated by
the prosaic mind it will become a sermon; the idealist like Maeterlinck
may make of it pure poetry, but neither of these are, in the true
sense, drama.

Hebbel further considered that since dramatic art must involve the
static with the dynamic, it necessitates certain modifications as
opposed to real life. If the enduring is to be expressed, art must
round the circle of Fate, whereas Life itself is a dubious thing,
whose individual meaning may lie in the history of its generation.
The whole then is expressed by the selection of significant parts, or
as he himself expresses it, by an exaggeration of the detached. From
this it follows that drama is more self-conscious than life. This is
why, especially in Shakespeare, the characters are more self-conscious
than they would be in reality. They become the centre-point of Fate,
not merely by the action of the play but by their own foreboding
and introspection. This is, however, to be reconciled with a living
humanity, so that the mental processes are natural, if intensified.
Added to this, in dramatic crises, the word comes straight before
or after the deed, so that both are significantly linked to the
principle. Any of Shakespeare’s tragic heroes will show the truth of
this reflection. The classic drama, which fixed one mighty moment in a
process, needed exposition rather than introspection, situation rather
than development. But the dynamic element, on which Hebbel insisted,
and which he found in Shakespeare, makes crucial the growth of the
individual, as well as his will-attitude.

In short, the self-consciousness of art makes situations psychologic as
well as actual, yet not, as with Browning, positing the psychology as
an end in itself. This atmosphere, in which the character assumes a
slightly exaggerated contemplative attitude, never obscures him.

Psychology brings in a third element, that of the poet’s own mind.
Hebbel differed from realists proper in regarding sheer objectivity
as impossible. Exterior mental processes must be strained through
the poet’s own experience, and hence partake of his personality.
Even if complete self-detachment were impossible, art existed for
the expression of the poet’s own being. This applies as well to the
material of drama. Neither actions of men nor events in time exist
objectively. For this reason he called history “the deposit of time;”
only the permanent elements left by the ages are history and the poet’s
sphere is not the reproduction of events but the interpolation of their
atmosphere. Following these tenets, Hebbel set himself to embrace the
three main currents from which arise human problems--the historic,
social and philosophic. In some he attempted to unite all three,
in others he touched a single aspect. It was a gigantic task only
partially fulfilled, but his greatest work has vindicated him.

Since Goethe there has not existed, in the field of poetic drama, so
powerful an individuality, nor one so completely expressed. Schiller,
being Goethe’s contemporary, does not come into the comparison. Yet
even he is more the vehicle of a movement than a great individual. When
his art stands by itself it is little more than a wonderfully dexterous
adaptation. His mastery of language and form cannot compensate for
the lack of stamina in his character. In the lyric and idyllic lay
his real bent, and his dramas tell more by the direction they gave
the German tongue and literature than by their innate worth. No
other could dispute with Hebbel but Kleist, who lacked, however, the
power of self-facing, the only way to true self-effacement in art.
In truth, Kleist had something of the prig in his composition. There
is an avoidance of the ultimate in him which makes him shrill when
intense and sentimental when human. Compare the tawdriness of Kleist’s
_Käthchen von Heildronn_ with _Agnes Bernauer_, the greatest of
Hebbel’s prose dramas. In _Maria Magdalena_ he had avoided portraying
a conflict between the nobility and higher life; in _Julia_ he had
touched it from an entirely individual point, one which could bring
about no conflict of the classes. When in _Agnes Bernauer_ he really
essayed the problem, he crushed all sentimentalism and rigidly drew
the tragedy to a brief and pitiless end. In the preface to _Maria
Magdalena_ Hebbel had declared that the union of a burgher-maiden with
a prince was not tragic but pathetic. Tragic outcome must, in his eyes,
be inevitable as death. For this reason he does not confine the story
to a mere personal intrigue, but involves in it the whole fortune of a
state. Innocent and lovely as the burgher-girl Agnes is, her marriage
with the prince makes her mere existence her death-warrant, and the
same necessity demands that the headstrong lover shall live and reign.
Conflict between classes is, in a masterly way, resolved into the
opposition of the State and the individual. Yet nowhere does the poet
drift into abstract theory. The calm wisdom of the old Duke is as
human and touching as the innocence of Agnes and the hot chivalry of
her husband. That Hebbel was marching here with surer step is shown
in the more clearly conceived scenes, the simpler language and the
naturalness of the plot. Against this play Kleist’s _Käthchen_ betrays
its melodrama the more strongly. In these two plays there is really the
difference between the two men.

The _Nibelungen_ trilogy will be regarded as Hebbel’s crowning
achievement. No doubt it is, but really to feel it you must have the
soul of Teutonism in you. Hebbel was too concerned with the interplay
of human motives to give the sheer pleasure of romantic atmosphere. One
feels at times that nothing but the invigorating jar of their own old
tongue can picture those strong-thewed and raven-helmeted ones. Hebbel
has diminished the childlike largeness of these mythic figures by
making them all too human. Nevertheless he has preserved the starkness
of warriors and made his triology a monument of the German genius.

Here we may mention that his style, so eminently fitted for such
subjects, suffers for its virtues. Form he has, but it is rather the
swing of a whirlpool than the symmetry of a crystal. He could not
glimpse a subject. Things were sucked into him with all their issues,
and kept in their expression the traces of his pondering. He startles
with antitheses and sharp epigrams which give at first the impression
of labour. They have in them none of the catchiness of half-thought
brilliance, but just because they are the result of an intellectual
thoroughness which had become integral, they have a cloudy effect
which later resolves itself into the haze of deep perspective. His
roughness of style, moreover, was not stumbled upon. The Dittmarscher
may have been sharp and brusque in his own utterance, but he did not
merely transfer his idiosyncrasies to his characters. In his essay
_On the Style of Drama_, he declares that speech is a living product
of the folk, and that only within these limits can the individual
modify it. He was repelled as much by the music-monger as by the
overwrought intellectual. When music comes, it is the idea self-born in
symmetry, not an arrangement of prettily coaxed words. The intellectual
cumulation of images, toilsomely hunted out, he dubs a “Chinese lantern
hung by a bankrupt near a gray abstraction.” That he loved the natural
music of words can well enough be seen from his sonnets; but he claims
that the most emotional situations in drama demand sharp daggers of
speech. If one, like Maeterlinck, seeks for these moments the highest
utterances of all, silence, he kills drama, even if it re-arises in
poetry. Dealing as Hebbel does with the most human of characters he
claims that crises are confused, curt, and even savage. In the relation
of episodes he favours the sonorous roll; but in the portrayal of
characters, especially in crises, he asserts that there are sudden
reversals of feeling, rips in the thread of thought, hidden things
projected by a single word--things that necessitate roughness of metre,
complexity and confusion of the period and contradiction of images.
The fight for expression is itself expression; he declares that what
is undeft is often passionate. Not always, however, has he reached his
effect. Though his style is not mannerism it can become a monotony of
sharpness. He was apt to forget that there can be an intensity of quiet
and tragic significance, not always in broken utterances, but in a
commonplace.

It is often the same with his psychology. The non-success of _Herod
and Mariamne_ at its initial performance is quite intelligible.
Though Hebbel wished here to reduce an “almost fantastic story to the
hardest reality” (understanding “reality” in his own sense), he has
succeeded only by burrowing his way there. The motives are not at
first sight evident, but when grasped they carry the conviction that
the situation has been revolved in every possible light and only that
one chosen which seemed tragically necessary. These true and appealing
characters are thus built up from within, and partake of the solidity
of their creator’s mind. The effect is more abiding than a patchwork of
subtleties and suggestions, being organic and unshakable. This can be
the only “realism”; for carried to a logical conclusion it would have
to combine the patience of the Chinese play with the verisimilitude of
the cinematograph.

Of the first two plays here translated something may be said. They
have been rendered because they appealed most to the translator, a
subjective reason, but a true ground for zest in the work. At the same
time more complete specimens of Hebbel’s dramatic art could not be
found.

_Gyges and his Ring_, adapted from Herodotus, Plato, and perhaps
Gautier, is a convincing example of Hebbel’s Teutonism. The most
prominent impression it leaves is that it is no Greek tale and no Greek
form. Kandaules is too reflective a philosopher to have lived in the
land of Lydian airs, Gyges has not the easy freedom of Greek youth; and
Rhodope leaps at a bound from a cloistered negation into the terrible
energy of an avenging goddess. Though she has the feminine pliancy and
pard-like ferocity of the Oriental, yet the blend of reasoned motive in
her conduct makes her a modern. Hebbel could not graecise, but he could
create from the weft of his own nature strong beings resolute in the
face of necessity for all their human error. If tragedy be the fatal
misdirection of virtues rather than the collision of virtue and vice,
this story is truly tragic; for three natures, all noble, by a single
error are swept to one drastic atonement. Here, too, Hebbel, who had
pondered so deeply on the meaning of the personality, shows what an
irrevocable thunderblast meets the ignorant tamperer therewith.

In the _Judith_, Hebbel had essayed a Hebrew theme somewhat callowly,
but his maturity produces a masterpiece. His fidelity to Josephus is
remarkable, yet in his hands a bare narrative becomes the interaction
of vivid forces. Woman he understood, and Mariamne has in her the
woman’s strange blend of self-sacrificial devotion and guardianship of
her soul. There is such truth of feeling, such regal sorrow, in this
deep-hearted Maccabean, and such a war between pride and abasement
resolved finally into a noble composure before the inevitable, that she
must stand as one of the great women of tragedy. As for Herod, brave
and resolute though he was, the erosive atmosphere of intrigue had made
him so familiar with the sham attitude of diplomacy that an unsullied
emotion baffled him. True insight would have made him responsive, for
ignoble he was not. _Gyges_ is the tragedy of a personality blindly
unveiled; this is the tragedy of a personality blindly veiled.

The historic significance is finely brought out by the opposition of
the statuesque Roman Titus against the shifting Hellenic decay. His
noble gravity is the last confessional of Mariamne and his arms receive
the swooning Herod. The future moulding influence of civilisation is
shown in this steel-clad nature.

The episode of the Three Kings may be regarded as unhappy. No doubt,
as the spiritual counterpart of Titus, it was meant to show the
irresistible oncoming of a new influence, as well as the futility
of Herod against Fate. But Fate is sufficient if she works from the
characters involved, unless, as in _Agnes Bernauer_, the general issue
is indissolubly linked with the particular. The doom of Herod was cast
without the final irony of Christianity, whereby the tragedy of man and
wife is unnecessarily inter-related with the world-drama.

As to the translation itself, the roll of Hebbel’s verse is so
distinctive that its preservation seemed necessary. Therefore, wherever
possible, his lengthy sentences have been given their full value. He
has also a habit of ending his lines with less accentuated words, and
carrying the stress to the beginning of the following line. This at
first jars, but as it was a conscious art-principle, it has been kept.
We have spoken above of his theory of dramatic verse. By this device
he tries to compensate for his roughness of style by another roughness
which has a lightening effect. Both in the roll of his blank verse
and in his broken rhythms it keeps his characters to a conversational
pitch, whereby he prevents an operatic effect. In reading such lines
as these, from _The Eve of St. Agnes_--

                  “And there hide
    Him in a chamber of such privacy
    That he might view her beauties unespied,”

one feels that by beginning the line with an unaccentuated word Keats
throws emphasis on the rhyme. Hebbel employs the opposite device to
prevent his heavy lines from crashing on the final word.

Let me lastly acknowledge my deep indebtedness to Mr. G. G. Nicholson,
B.A., B.C.L., of the University of Sydney, whose fine scholarship and
ready advice have been invaluable. If the rendering be correct, it is
his virtue; the defects that will become apparent must be laid at the
door of my own deficiencies.

                                                            L. H. ALLEN.

    SYDNEY, N.S.W.,

          _February_ 7, 1914.




BIBLIOGRAPHY


    Judith, 1841; Gedichte, 1842; Genoveva, 1843; Maria Magdalena,
    1844; Der Diamant, 1847; Neue Gedichte, 1848; Herodes und
    Mariamne, 1850; Der Rubin, 1851; Ein Trauerspiel in Sicilien,
    1851; Julia, 1851; Michel Angelo, 1855; Agnes Bernauer, 1855;
    Gyges und sein Ring, 1856; Mutter und Kind (Gedicht), 1859;
    Die Nibelungen, 1862; Demetrius, 1864; Tagebücher, 1885-87;
    Briefwechsel mit Freunden und berühmten Zeitgenossen, 1890-92;
    Briefe, 1908, 1913.

    COLLECTED WORKS: Edition by E. Kuh, 12 vols., 1866-68; edition by
    Krumm, 12 vols., 1900; edition by Werner, 12 vols., 1901-7.

    LIFE: E. Kuh, 1877; Kulke, 1878; Bartels, 1899; A. von
    Winterfeld, 1908. _See also_ Wuetschke, H., Hebbel,
    Bibliographie, 1910; A. Gubelmann, Studies in the Lyric Poems of
    F. Hebbel, 1912.




CONTENTS


                                                        PAGE

    GYGES AND HIS RING (_translated by_ L. H. ALLEN)       1

    HEROD AND MARIAMNE (_translated by_ L. H. ALLEN)      67

    MARIA MAGDALENA (_translated by_ BARBER FAIRLEY)     185




                          GYGES AND HIS RING

                        A TRAGEDY IN FIVE ACTS

                   TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH VERSE BY

                              L. H. ALLEN




DRAMATIS PERSONÆ


    KANDAULES, _King of Lydia_.

    RHODOPE, _his Queen_.

    GYGES, _a Greek_.

    LESBIA  }
    HERO    }  _Slave Maidens_.

    THOAS  }
    KARNA  }   _Slaves_.

    THE PEOPLE.

_The action is prehistoric and mythical. It takes place within a period
of twenty-four hours._




HEBBEL’S PLAYS

GYGES AND HIS RING




ACT I


SCENE 1

_A Hall_

_Enter_ KANDAULES _and_ GYGES. KANDAULES _buckles on his sword_. THOAS
_follows with the diadem_.

KANDAULES.

    To-day you’ll see what Lydia can achieve!
    I know you Grecians, though your necks are bended,
    Just for your standstill plight bear the old yoke
    With gnashing teeth and lip-curl at your lords.
    No thing on earth were easily invented
    You were not quick to better, were’t alone
    The crown you add, you set it on--and lo,
    The thing’s your work, you see that it is good!

                                          [THOAS _hands him the diadem_.

    Bring the new diadem! What use is this?
    Has your dolt’s hand the sword as well mistaken?

                                                  [_Looks at his sword._

    Why yes, by Herakles whose feast we’re holding!
    What, Thoas, are you doddering ere your time?

THOAS.

    I thought----

KAN.

                 Well, what?

THOAS.

                          Not for five hundred years
    Has King in other trapping graced the games
    Your Ancestor, the Puissant, has stablished,
    And when, the feast before, you made endeavour
    To oust the hallowed things from olden honour,
    The folk stood rooted, horrified, amazed,
    Muttering as ne’er before.

KAN.

                             And so you think
    I should have marked their gapes for my salvation?
    I’ve hit your thought?

THOAS.

                          Lord, not without a shudder
    I touch this diadem, and not till now
    Has hand of mine been closed on this sword’s hilt
    That all the seed of Herakles once brandished;
    But these new baubles I can see unblenching
    Like any other such as blinks and glances
    And is your own for paying of the price.
    Not on Hephaestus do I need to think,
    At sight of these, who for divine Achilles
    His weapons smithied,--ay, and in the fire
    Wherewith the thunderbolts for Zeus are steeled;
    Nor yet on Thetis, she who bade her daughters
    For him be fisherfolk of pearl and coral
    That thus his decking fail not of its fill.
    But _this_ sword--why, I knew the man that forged it,
    And him by whom _this_ diadem was pieced!

KAN.

    Eh, Gyges!

THOAS.

            Sire, fair faith speaks out of me!
    If I am overbold, ’tis for your welfare.
    Believe my words, the many thousand folk
    That stream t’assembly hither,--ay, albeit
    They walk in finer wool and fare the daintier,--
    Are just as fond or pious-prim as I.
    This crown here and your head--these are for them,
    Your henchman vouches, halves of a single whole,
    And in like grade this sword here and your arm.

KAN.

    And that’s the thought of all?

THOAS.

                                Yes, by my head!

KAN.

    Then there’s no room for dawdling! Take them off
    And do what I have bid!

                                         [THOAS _takes off the regalia_.

GYGES.

                     You’ve hurt the man.

KAN.

    I know; but say, what else could I have done?
    ’Tis true what he has said; here the King’s worth
    Is gauged but by his crown, and the crown’s worth
    Owed to its rust. Woe to its furbisher!
    Brighter but lighter--gain and loss are matched.
    But why bemoan it if for just this once
    I so forgot me--sheer worn out, and loath
    Only by force of heirloom garb to glitter,
    Pass current just as minted coins pass current
    By take-for-granted worth, and share with statues
    That in the sacred temple-niches stand
    A blind and blockish sacrosanctity?
    You can’t undo what’s done.

                                  [THOAS _comes with the new adornment_.

                                 Ah, thus ’tis good!

                                               [_He puts on the diadem._

    That fits in place, and only what my realm
    Of pearls and precious jewels disenwombs
    From out the miner’s shaft or bed of ocean,
    Not more nor less, is here enharmonied.
    The noble stone that is not found among us,
    It matters not how fair, is straitly banned.
    I need not say I’ve left a place for such
    As are unearthed in the next hundred years.
    Now do you follow?
         (_To_ GYGES.)    That one fitly suits
    Some massive giant-skull such as your sculptors
    Are wont to give my forebear for a head-piece,
    When in his lion-skin, with bulky club,
    Towering above a streamlet’s mossy rim,
    You make him useful as a children’s bogy.

                                               [_He girds on the sword._

    This sword is somewhat lighter than the old one;
    But that’s no loss--you’ll swing it, if you must,
    Not outside merely ’neath unhampered heaven
    Where giants at each other volley boulders,

                                           [_He draws it and swings it._

    No, but in space cramped human-small, like this!
    Then, Thoas, spare the pains of a third sermon,
    To-day I’ve heard the second.

THOAS.

                          Pardon, sire!
    And yet you know ’tis not the young man’s limbs
    In which a change of weather gives its warning,
    It is the old man’s bones that feel it first.

                                                                [_Exit._

GYGES.

    He goes in sorrow!

KAN.

                      True; he’s loath to think
    That the next thunderbolt will now strike me;
    And that’s fast in his mind. I may, perhaps,
    Ere that can hap, be gulped into Earth’s entrails
    Unless, forsooth, the Minotaur appears!
    Such is their fashion; do not therefore think
    But light of them. This very day you’ll see
    Their fighting stuff.

GYGES.

                  And wish to join the fighting.

KAN.

    What, Gyges?

GYGES.

                 Sire, I beg you for the boon.

KAN.

    No, no! Beside myself you shall be seated
    That all may see how much I give you honour
    And will that all men give you honour-meed.

GYGES.

    But if you honour me you’ll not refuse.

KAN.

    You know not what you do. Know you the Lydians?
    You Grecians are a cunning folk; you set
    The others all to spinning, and you weave,
    And lo, a net wherein no piece of cordage
    Belongs to you, yet the whole thing’s your own!
    How easy ’twere to tighten, and how swift
    The wide world clutched in capture if the arm
    The fisher stretched were but a little stronger,
    The arm that should control! But there’s the rub!
    You have no trick to lure the nervy tendons
    From out our bodies, so with artful seeming
    We look much blinder than in truth we are,
    And with a covert laugh we bungle in
    Because a tiny fin-flick sets us free.

GYGES.

    We celebrate these games as well.

KAN.

                                        Yes, yes,
    After a fashion, ’mongst yourselves. There Dorians
    Grip with Ionians, and then, to cap it,
    It comes to this--Boeotians join the fray,
    And so you think that Ares’ self looks on
    And with a shudder marks your every blow.
    Gyges, had every prize that’s offered there
    Been won by you, still were I forced to warn you
    Avoid the lists e’en for the lowest guerdon.
    We’ve ever set a wild and bloody pace;
    But even a single twig of silver poplar,
    Such as to-day are in their thousands strown,
    Ventured by you, a Greek and in my graces,
    Would ne’er allow you scapement of your life.

GYGES.

    And so I have your “yes”; no longer now
    Can you withhold consent.

KAN.

                        You take it so?
    I were best mute.

GYGES.

              I came, Sire, not alone
    For begging. (_He brings forth a ring._) Take it! ’Tis a royal ring.
    You look on it, find naught of mark therein,
    You’re mazed I am so bold to make the offer,
    You’ll take it, too, as from a child a flower,
    To keep the poor and artless grace unwounded
    That plucked it for you, not because you’re pleased.
    It’s surface-show is meagre--true--and plain
    And yet you cannot, for your kingly realm,
    Purchase it for your own, nor yet with force,
    ’Spite all your power, turn robber ’gainst its wearer
    Unless of free consent he will the gift.
    You wear it so (_indicating with signs_) to make the metal rest
    With forward trend--’tis but a trinket-thing,
    Perchance not even as much, but give a twist
    Just so far round that with its tiny shine
    This stone of dullish red can fling its rays
    And presto! you are viewless and go striding
    Like gods enclouded up and down the world.
    Therefore contemn it not, for once again--
    It is a royal ring, and this same day
    Long since I chose in which to make my present.
    ’Tis you alone may wear it, no one else.

KAN.

    Why, things before unheard sent even to us
    Their rumouring; men spoke about a woman,
    Medea was her name, and arts she plied
    Such that the very moon was earthwards chanted;
    But never have I heard of such a ring.
    Where did you get it, then?

GYGES.

                            From out a grave.
    From out a grave that lies in Thessaly.

KAN.

    You oped a grave and sacrileged its peace?

GYGES.

    Nay, nay, my King--I found it oped to hand.
    I only crept therein to slip from robbers
    Toward hid retreat, for they in whelming odds
    Were hot-foot on my track and harried me
    As I, by some adventurous prompting driven,
    Of late a desolate wooded mountain ranged.
    The urns were overthrown and spilt their ashes,
    In touching disarray the shards were scattered,
    And in the sickly shaft of westering sunlight
    That pierced a passage through the chinkéd wall
    I saw a wisp of pallid dust was swaying.
    It rose before me as the final motes
    That vestige death, and turned my mood so eerie
    That, lest my fellow-flesh, my very fathers
    Perchance, be mixed with my unconscious breathing,
    Long time I held the air within my breast.

KAN.

    Well? And the robbers?

GYGES.

                         Found my every trace
    Was vanished, so it seemed, for far and farther
    Their dwindling voices died, and now I thought me
    Already safe assured, although not yet
    I left my glimmering retreat. As now
    In such a plight I cramped upon my knees
    My sight fell suddenly upon this ring.
    From out the wreckage heaped in tangled waste
    Its stone, as though it were a living thing,
    Half minding me of some sharp serpent’s eye,
    Shot sparkles at me. Straight I raised it up,
    I blew the ashes from it and I spoke:--
    “Who bore thee once on his long-mouldered finger?”
    And then, to see if ’twere a man had worn it,
    I put it on, and scarce the deed was done
    When from without rang--“Halt! He must be here!
    See you the grave? Then onward, onward, comrades!
    We have our man!” and quick appeared the troop.
    But I was loath, like some defenceless beast
    Harried into a hole, to suffer slaughter,
    And springing forth I charged impetuous--flashing
    Full at them, in my hand the lifted sword.
    The sun was near the dipping of its disc
    And streaming, like a candle destined soon
    To quench its glow, with doubly vivid ray.
    But they, as though for them alone the night
    Outran its hour, stormed on with furious curses
    Passing me by, and ringed them round the grave.
    They raked it through, and, as I still was hid,
    Cried out in scorn--“What odds? We’d find he bore
    Nothing upon him but the truculent eye
    That with its taunting glance so roused our rage;
    Some other soon enough will blow _that_ out!”
    Then once again, but with chagrin’s slow footsteps,
    Peering around and in my face even staring,
    They passed me by and I was still unseen.

KAN.

    And then you thought----

GYGES.

                      Not on the ring--not yet.
    My notion was a god had wrought a wonder
    To save me, and upon my knees I flung me
    And thus to the Invisible One I spoke:--
    “I know not who thou art, and if from me
    Thy face thou hid’st, I cannot slay for thee
    The beast that is thy consecrated due;
    But for a sign that I have thanks at heart
    And lack not courage, I will bring to thee
    The fiercest of these robbers as thy meed,
    And this I swear, how hard soe’er it prove.”
    I hastened after them and slipped amid
    Their company, and I was seized with shudders
    Before myself, to see how I alone
    Was marked not of them, how they spoke together,
    As I were air and void, right through my form
    And through it even handed bread and wine.
    My eyes grew overveiled and ranging fell
    Upon the ring-set stone whose radiance red
    And brilliant from my hand was scintillating
    With restless well and swell and pearly bubbling
    Puffed into vapour; and it seemed an eye
    That ever breaks in blood which ever steams.
    I turned it, sheer compelled, to make confession,
    Sheer terrified; for all these pearls were glinting
    Like just as many stars; it touched my mood
    As though the pure ethereal stream of light
    Lay naked to mine eyes and I were blind
    From overglory, as the harmony
    They tell of in the spheres makes all men deaf.
    But straight I felt me in a lusty grip
    And “What is this? Hey! Who held him concealed?
    A pretty joke!” was ringing in my ears.
    And now ten fists were grappling for my throttle,
    Ten others made to rip my raiment from me,
    And I had surely met inglorious end
    Had not the clumsiest fist of all the mob
    Held back to snatch the ring; for suddenly
    The cry was raised--“Hallo! He is not poor!
    Here’s a fine fish i’ the net! See, blinking gold,
    Ay, and a precious stone! Come, here with it!”
    But almost in the selfsame-taken breath
    Rang out--“A god, a god is come among us!”
    And lo, they all were lying at my feet!

KAN.

    Just as their hands about the ring were scrambling
    They turned it round again and went a-quiver
    As you evanished like a shape of cloud.

GYGES.

    It must be so. But now I turned it back,
    At last initiate in its mystic secret,
    And filled with pride and recklessness I called,
    “A god! Even so! And each pays penance due!”
    Then hot-foot set upon them. Horror-struck,
    As though I bore within my hands the thunder
    And at my side new modes of death in thousands,
    They scarce retained the heart and strength for flight.
    But I was on their heels as though compelled
    To act the vicar in the Furies’ office,
    And not a soul came free of my revenge.
    I would have rendered to the grave its ring,
    But though I’d strewn the way with bloody corses
    That marked the backward path, neither at evening
    Nor yet with morning could it be discovered,
    And so against my will the ring was mine.

KAN.

    Such treasure has no peer.

GYGES.

                            Said I not so?
    A royal ring! Then take it, Royal One!

KAN.

    Not till the battle’s ended.

GYGES.

                              Sire, since then
    I never have and ne’er again will wear it.
    So niggard of your wood? O fie! A forest
    Will not be needed for my funeral pyre;
    A single tree’s enough, and trust this arm,
    You’ll get remittance of the single tree.

KAN.

    Then give’t! I’ll test it.

GYGES.

                             And I’ll weapon me.

                                                              [_Exeunt._


SCENE 2

_The Queen’s Apartment_

_Enter_ RHODOPE _with her attendants, among them_ LESBIA _and_ HERO.

RHODOPE.

    And now be happy, maidens mine; to-day
    Your whims are free. Though I must blame you dear
    If other times you even hide and listen,
    And though my gay-heart Hero yesterday,
    Who clambered up the tree, were sternly scolded
    Had not a bough, for all her lightsome limb,
    Swift-snapping dealt her punishment enough,
    Being over-weak for such a weight of wonder----

HERO.

    O Queen, and if it verily caught your eyes
    You’ll know as well it was the thickest one
    Of all our garden-trees that I had chosen.

RHOD.

    The thickest one! Maybe; but certain ’tis
    The one that stood the nearest to the wall.

HERO.

    The thickest one of all! I clambered up
    And pierced into a very night of green.
    ’Twas well-nigh eerie when the golden day
    Was thus behind me left, and in the darkness
    I still crept on.

RHOD.

                   What made you do it, then?

HERO.

    No wish to bring Olympus some few feet
    Nearer my reach; no, such I freely granted
    The nightingale a-trilling overhead.
    I wanted--nay, but laugh not--I can never
    Forget my cradle-rocking, and I wanted
    A tiny rock up yonder.

RHOD.

                     Nothing more?

HERO.

    And as I swung, nay not of set desire,
    But as I swung--no more, just peep a fraction;
    I’d be so glad to know if round our garden,
    As scowling Karna ever says to us,
    There runs a lake.

LESBIA.

              A lake!

HERO.

                       Ah, you know better?

LESBIA.

    Ho, have you ever heard it here a-swishing?
    And is a lake untroublous as yourself?

RHOD.

    I will not question further, for I know
    You’ll not do thus again. Ne’er fell a maiden
    So soft as you, nor e’er was frighted so.

LESBIA.

    Yes, all her limbs were swooned away.

HERO.

                                           And never
    Ought I have fallen, for a stronger bough
    Was near enough; but as it moved it swayed
    A nest with young ones, and I would beware
    Of trampling on them lest the tender brood,
    Its featherless wings already in a flutter,
    Be thrown in flurry.

LESBIA.

                This then was the cause?
    Yet they flew up. You ended with a grasp,
    There’s not a doubt, a desperate grasp for safety.

RHOD.

    Tease long as e’er you will; this is the day
    On which the cabined house for you is open;
    Now to it as you may and sate your eyes!

HERO.

    And you?

RHOD.

            Nay, eye not me. What’s granted you
    Is merely not forbid to me. To-day
    I cannot be your paragon and pattern.

HERO.

    And once again you will not see the feast?

RHOD.

    Nay, lest my presence mar your merry frolic.
    With us it is not wont, and I should feel
    As though I were to eat and have no hunger
    Or drink and feel no thirst. It seems to me
    That we’ve a better way at home than yours,
    For ne’er without a shudder turn you home
    From feasts like these whose outset is so luring.
    And her I love most dearly who most deeply
    Can thrill with pain nor goes a second time.
    But that would not show blame in you--why, no!
    Only I’m happy that my Lesbia,
    Who’s grown to woman with you, feels as I.

LESBIA.

    Will you to-day forgive me----

RHOD.

                                  Why, what’s this?
    And what must I forgive you? You would go?
    Oh, but to take my praise back! Now she’s shamed,
    Ashamed to be the daughter of her folk,
    And has no cause. Am I myself aught other?
    Go, go, and tell me who the victor was.

HERO.

    Young Gyges too will surely join the fighting,
    He of the noble voice.

RHOD.

                     So soon you know
    How rings his voice?

HERO.

                   Oh, yes--but nothing more.
    To-day we’ll see him, and believe my words,
    She goes, like us, only for him.

LESBIA.

                            But I
    May cheat you, and remaining prove your falsehood.

HERO.

    Oh, that you’ll never do.

                                           [KANDAULES _enters in haste_.

KAN.

                               Rhodope, greeting!
    But know you who I am? A carpet-gallant,
    A kingly ninth-of-man, forsooth a measurer
    Of ells but not of swords, who is to blame
    That Herakles’ twelve deeds have not long since
    Found four-and-twenty other feats and greater
    For overmatch. If you will not believe ’t
    Why only ask Alcaeus--old curmudgeon!
    You know him not? Nor I, before to-day.
    And know you how I use to make men happy?
    I speak thus:--“Come, young man, here is a seed!
    Now plant it in the earth and sprinkle o’er
    The spot with water; do it day by day
    And be assured that when your hair is frosty
    You’ll have a meal of cherries for your pains.
    What? ‘Sweet or sour?’--You’ll not find out till then!”
    I give you Agron as my guarantee
    Worthy Alcaeus names him worthy friend,
    His perfect peer, but not so white of beard.

RHOD.

    Your mood is merry.

KAN.

                        Ay, and wherefore not?
    ’Tis true Alcaeus, outright in rebellion,
    Will make against me soon as e’er I venture
    To show myself to him as thus to you,
    Bedecked, I mean, with the new diadem.
    Agron will deign me succour, and for thanks
    I’m merely forced to swear--be not astounded
    At such a lamblike heart--to keep my garb
    For aye unaltered, and a sword to carry
    Whose mere unsheathing drains my utmost strength.

RHOD.

    Where did you gain this knowledge?

KAN.

                                       Through no spy,
    Nor yet the more through any false-heart friend,
    But from themselves, direct from their own mouths.

RHOD.

    You’re pleased to mock my questioning.

KAN.

                                           No, no!
    I speak in utter earnest. I stood by
    While they set nails a-grubbing at the tables,
    Digging their whetted teeth in their own lips
    As though ’twere game and not their very flesh,
    And took the oath which sure enough they’ll hold.
    It makes a Bar of God here in a fashion--
    One hacks at me, the other wards the blow,
    And Diké passes verdict if she can.

RHOD.

    You must have eavesdropped, then; I’ll not believe ’t.
    If I come in a place all unexpected
    I make a warning noise that I be marked,
    And what should be unheard be left unsaid.
    And you--no, no--that is no kingly act.

KAN.

    Why, surely not--but _that_ you’d ne’er unriddle.
    You see this ring? How do you rate its worth?

RHOD.

    How can I tell from whom it comes?

KAN.

                                        From Gyges.

RHOD.

    You’ll think it past all rating then.

KAN.

                                          It is;
    And yet you dream not why. Then hear the marvel--
    If any put it on it makes him viewless.

RHOD.

    Viewless?

KAN.

               Just now I tried it for myself.
    “Nay, no more climbing, Hero! Only birdlings
    Go hiding in the leafage!”[1]

RHOD.

                           Lesbia!

KAN.

    Through every door I stalk along--naught holds me,
    Nor lock nor bolt, at distance due.

RHOD.

                                  How fearful!

KAN.

    For all bad souls, you mean.

RHOD.

                                No, no, I say!
    For all good souls, still more, still more! (_To_ LESBIA.) Can you
    Still breathe unruffled, will not blushing shame
    Dissolve you now you know’t? Sire, cast it hence
    Down, down into the deepest flood! When more
    Than mortal strength is given a man, he’s born
    Half-god, innate, sufficient. Give it me!
    My people say that things through which the world
    May fly to fragments, here and there on earth
    Are lying hid. They reach us from the time
    When men and gods still walked the world together
    And pledged their love with mutual gifts. This ring
    Is of that time, and who can tell what hand
    Bore this, what goddess put it on, what bond
    It sealed of yore? Do you not shiver to think
    That her dark gift’s your arrogated plunder
    And that you draw her vengeance on your head?
    I shudder at the very sight--then give it!

KAN.

    On one condition--this, that you as Queen
    Will show you at the feast to-day.

RHOD.

                                How can I?
    You bore away a bride from farthest borders
    Seclusion-hedged, and knew her as she was.
    Once you were glad that never an eye ere yours,
    Except alone my Sire’s, had rested on me
    And that none after you should win the sight.

KAN.

    Forgive! I only think the precious stone
    That’s not displayed----

RHOD.

                       Will lure no robber’s lust!

KAN.

    Enough. Alas, this “No” is but your wont.
    Yes, let the wind blow fresh from every quarter
    On fluttered veils--you’ll keep yours tight and trim.

                                                               [_Music_.

    The pomp! No time for kings to fail their presence.

RHOD.

    Yes, but the rebels? Ah, I’m pained to-day
    That I dare not go with you.

KAN.

                           You are kind,
    But have no anxious fret--the matter’s settled.

RHOD.

    In truth?

KAN.

               In truth. I need not say through fear;
    I punished them through force alone, not choice.
    This life’s too short to let a man therein
    Earn even so much as the desert of death,
    And so to-day I’d not condemn one gladly.

                                                                [_Exit._

RHOD.

    Now all of you begone!

LESBIA.

                        I’ll stay, my Queen.

RHOD.

    Oh, no; your nurse ne’er crooned a prophecy
    That some man’s face would token death for you.

                               [_Exeunt_ LESBIA, HERO, _and the others_.

    They’re over-dull to dream here; even the noblest (_looking
          after_ LESBIA)
    Is irked by what I deem peculiar joy.


SCENE 3

    _Open space. A crowd._ KANDAULES _on his throne_. LESBIA, HERO,
    _and others at one side, on a raised structure. The games are
    just over. General stir and drifting into groups. Wrestlers,
    boxers, charioteers, etc., come by degrees to sight, all crowned
    with branches of the Silver Poplar. Wine is handed round. Music.
    The Feast begins._

THE PEOPLE.

    Hail, Gyges, hail!

KAN. (_gazing into the background_).

    In discus-throwing, too?
    For the third time? I should be sore to see it!
    Why this leaves not a doit for mine own people!

                         [_He descends and goes to meet_ GYGES _as he
                         comes from the background. The people are
                         still acclaiming him and make way for him._

    A modest fellow, you, forsooth! You take
    No more than’s here.

GYGES.

                  My Lord, I fought to-day
    As Greek and not as Gyges.

KAN.

                         All the sorrier
    For us if the new standard’s set by you.
    Why, then we’ll have to start at lumber-hunting
    And stuff to bulging those old skins of dragons
    That, left by Herakles in some odd place,
    Some temple hiding-hole, must now lie mouldering.
    The bladdered serpent, too, the hundred-headed,
    And any bogy that can raise Greek hair.
    You hear me not.

GYGES.

             I do, I do!

KAN.

                          Oh no!
    I see too well. You slant at yonder maidens
    Your listless eyes. They see it too. Look there!
    The shorter twits the taller. You go red?
    Pooh, shame on you!

GYGES.

                I’m thirsty, Sire.

KAN.

                                    You’re thirsty?
    Why, that’s another tale. Who fights like you
    Has honest right unto a goodly drink,
    And though I lack the right I’ll share the draught.
    Ah, now there comes the part o’ the feast I love!
    (_Beckons to a servant._) Come hither!

                              [_The servant brings a goblet of wine._
                              KANDAULES _pours some drops on the earth_.

                        First the root and then the branch!

                 [_He drinks and is about to hand the goblet to_ GYGES,
                 _but he is again looking towards the raised structure_.

    Come! Ho! Brunette or dark? That is the question,
    Eh, friend?

GYGES.

         Oh, Sire?

KAN.

                     Your palate likes the wine?

GYGES.

    I’ve not yet drunk.

KAN.

                         You know’t? Then let your ears
    Accept reminder of your thirst and to it!
    I guarantee you this, that long enough
    She’ll stay to let you ease the press of pain.

GYGES (_drinks_).

    That cools!

KAN.

                                      Alack the day, down sinks your star!

                           [_The maidens retire, but can still be seen._

    Well, it was time. Just glance around. Already
    They twine as though about a Thyrsus-staff
    That, sudden-launched from earth in upward sally,
    And swift and swifter dartwise nearing heaven,
    Cascades the clusters of a million grapes.
    Wine fits the subtler stuff of winged Beings,
    But not the world of hobbling crawling man,
    It stands him on his head. That old man there
    Would never stick at mounting on a tiger
    Or pranking his shrunk temples with a garland,
    As Dionysos did when Ganges-bound.
    But I’m at home with loosed wits--Was she fair?

GYGES.

    I know not if what pleases me be fair.

KAN.

    Say “yes”--no blushes! an eye like a coal,
    Only a-glimmer, but at lightest breath
    Bursting in sparks shot with such twining hues
    You could not tell if it be black or brown;
    And then, as though this restless weft of colour
    Immingled with her every drop of blood,
    ’Tis fluctuant ’twixt shame and love unbreathed
    That gives her blush a tint of peerless charm.

GYGES.

    You make complete what the wind half-way wrought;
    It stirred the fringes, you uplift the veil.

KAN.

    Not that you owe the bent knee at her power--
    Nay, should I guide you to another vision,
    A sight like this, for all its winsomeness,
    You’d purge your eye of as it were a fleck
    That touched your glass with tarnish.

GYGES.

                                  Think you, Sire?

KAN.

    Even so; but stay--you should not cry a prize
    Which cannot be displayed--that earns you jeering.
    Who’s gulled by cries of “pearls!” when the hand’s shut?

GYGES.

    I.

KAN.

       Gyges--why, the shadow of Rhodope
    Cast in the shine o’ the moon--you smile! We’ll drink.

GYGES.

    I smile not.

KAN.

                  Smile you should, then! Where’s the man
    That cannot boast thus? Should you speak to me
    As I to you, I’d say--“Then show her me
    Else hold your tongue.”

GYGES.

                    I trust you.

KAN.

                                  Trust me, eh?
    The eye commands your credence, not the ear.
    You trust me! Ho! This shrinking bit of a girl
    Gave you hot cheeks, and now--enough, enough--
    I’ll pout my breast no more with windy babble
    Such as for all this length of time I’ve used.
    Nay, you shall see her.

GYGES.

                    See her!

KAN.

                              And to-night.
    I want some soul to witness that I’m not
    A futile fool, a mere self-dupe that boasts
    He has the fairest woman for his kissing.
    I fill the want with you.

GYGES.

                  Oh, never more
    Think on it!--for the man ’twere blot of soul,
    But for a woman,--woman such as she
    That even by day----

KAN.

                Why, why--she’ll never learn it.
    Have you forgot the ring? And I’ll ne’er be
    A happy man till your lips say I am.
    Come, ask you--if the crown were to your liking
    Should you be bound to wear it but in darkness?
    Well, that’s the plight I’m in with her. She is
    The Queen of women, but I hold possession
    Of her as Ocean holds its pearls--none dreams
    How rich I am, and when I’m dead and done with
    There’s not a friend can set it on my tombstone,
    And so I lie i’ the grave, beggar to beggar.
    Then do not say me nay, but take the ring.

                                             [_He proffers it to_ GYGES,
                                             _who will not take it_.

    The night is closing in; I’ll show the chamber
    And when you see me tread the floor with her
    Then follow us.

                                          [_Takes_ GYGES _by the hand
                                          and draws him along with him_.

                    I lay demand on you,
    And is it not a debt to Lesbia forfeit?
    Perhaps she is the vanquisher.

                                                              [_Exeunt._




ACT II

_A Hall. Early morning._ _Enter_ THOAS.


THOAS.

    I will and must have further parley with him.
    To think what I’ve been forced to hear this night!
    Heaven knows I went not out to catch the talk,
    Yet home I come as packed as though I were
    The wandering ear o’ the bloodiest of tyrants
    And scarce had faith I’d see my Lord again.
    Rebellion, imminent raid of sudden foemen,
    Yea, a new choice of King! Is’t possible?
    I dreaded much, but dreaded not so much.
    Hist, hist! Are those not footfalls? Yes! Why, who
    Is out of bed with greybeards ere the morn?
    The youthful Gyges! Ho! but if you knew
    What I now know you’d have no droop i’ the gait!

                                           [_He retires._ _Enter_ GYGES.

GYGES.

    And once again I’m here! What will I here?
    I sicken in the fresh of heaven. With scent
    The air’s besprent, so leaden and sense-steeping
    ’Twould seem that every flower with one accord
    Were opened, that the lungs of men be stifled,
    And Earth herself outgasped her latest breath.

THOAS.

    So gay and early, Karna? Pardon, I took you,
    Lord, for another. You not yet in bed?
    I trow the taste of fame bans sleep--oho!

GYGES.

    The taste of fame?

THOAS.

                      Why, look at all the garlands
    You carried off----

GYGES.

            So that the laurel-tree
    Need never fear me more! My wish was merely
    To prove that bones may be inside a man
    And marrow in those bones, although that man
    Snap not a zither’s strings to tattered shreds
    At the first touch. Now not a soul but knows it
    Whate’er the doubt he may till now have had;
    And that is good.

THOAS.

              But why then take no sleep?

GYGES.

    Why do you take no drink?

THOAS.

                             I guess you rose
    Once ere this.

GYGES.

            If I went to bed, why yes!

THOAS.

    Just what I’d like to know; for if he’s heard
    What I have heard--Pooh! no--I’ll vow he can’t have.

                                                      [_Slowly retires._

GYGES.

    She slumbers still! O blest, who dares to wake her!
    ’Tis dared by the nightingale that even now
    Still half in dream sweet orison begins;
    ’Tis dared--He comes! What can he think of me?

                                                     [_Enter_ KANDAULES.

    She wakes, and yet she offers show of sleeping.

KAN.

    Gyges! So soon? Or should I ask you--still?
    But no, I have your word.

GYGES.

                      Here is the ring!

KAN.

    So early and so hasty?

GYGES.

                        ’Tis your own.

KAN.

    You trust yourself no longer to retain it?

GYGES.

    Why not? And yet why should I? Take the thing!

KAN.

    This tells me even more than what your sigh
    Already told i’ the night.

GYGES.

                       Forgive it, Sire!

KAN.

    Why, what a thing you say! It was my triumph!

GYGES.

    And did you only hear it then?

KAN.

                                     Oh no--
    She started up, she shrieked--and did all that
    So fully slip your eyes? No further then
    I need to ask if I am conqueror.

GYGES.

    It did not slip my eyes.

KAN.

                                Keep on--deny
    Your wits were all a pother. Nay, I have
    Still better proof to clinch the thing--you went
    So far to turn the ring and know it not!

GYGES.

    And know it not!

KAN.

                        She trembled, and when she
    Grew ’ware o’ the noise, she cried, “Arise, Arise!
    I’ the corner lurks a man! It is his will
    Thy bane to be, or mine! Where is thy sword?”
    I made pretence I felt her fear, and did so--
    When lo, revealed stood--you, before me there,
    Sharp outlined by the lamp’s intensest beam.
    Is that enough? Now are you dumb to me?

GYGES.

    My will was to be seen.

KAN.

                             You say that now
    To rob my victory of its edge. Had I
    Not stepped between to shut you from her glances
    Or ere they lit on you, I had been forced
    To strike you dead.

GYGES.

                Sire, this I knew right well,
    And just because I’d force you to the action
    I turned the ring around with hasty twitch.

KAN.

    What, Gyges?

GYGES.

              Yes, it shocked the sight of heaven
    This boldness--yes, I felt it.

KAN.

                             I allowed it.

GYGES.

    But in the stifling closeness of that moment,
    It seemed as though you had no right thereto,
    And I would punish you with me; for fain
    You had not been to strike me dead.

KAN.

                                  You varlet!

GYGES.

    And even now a shudder thrills my soul
    As though some ugly thing I had committed
    For which ’tis true the lip may lack a name
    But not the conscience the implanted sense.
    Yea, if I held that trash, that Dead Man’s Ring
    Thrust on my hand by you, nor yet in wrath
    Pitched it before your feet; and if instead
    I used its power once more for speedy flight,
    What checked the act was shame I felt for her,
    For her I’d spare the shocked recoil, for her
    The eternal crypt of shadow round her Being,
    Not you--forgive my fevered wish--the deed.

KAN.

    You are a fool!

GYGES.

                 A fool! It drove me forth
    As though, if still I tarried there, a sense,
    A newer, purer, must in her awaken,
    The self-same sense that woke in Artemis
    Before Actaeon’s scan, that must betray
    To woman, as to goddess, what had passed.
    I’ll flee not after murder in such mind.

KAN.

    Murder--Nay, nay!

GYGES.

                   Who knows? The gods’ aversion
    Is on polluted heads. Oh, what if now
    The golden Aphrodite, deep-offended,
    Were forced t’ avert her from her dearest daughter,
    Because a stranger eye had ’filed the pure!
    She’s loath to do’t; she lingers, for she hopes
    The swoop of retribution follows on.
    Goddess, remit no smile! I bring the due!

KAN.

    There spake the Grecian!

GYGES.

                           Sire, vouchsafe to me
    A last request.

KAN.

              A thousand, if you will,
    But not the last request; that comes too soon.

GYGES.

    Take me as sacrifice! I make you gift
    Of my young life--turn not the gift away!
    Still many a splendid year I count as mine
    And every one will swell your own if you
    Will but accept them at Zeus’ altar-stone.
    Then follow; let me hold to you one hand
    In the firm grip of pact, and with the other
    Thrust me clean through by custom’s holy ordinance;
    With rapture, yea, with smiles it shall be done.

KAN.

    I almost rue the deed! Here rant and rave,
    Within suspicion--Bah!

GYGES.

                   Why vacillate?
    How oft have young men in free-willed devotion
    Libated their own blood to some war-chief
    What time death’s shadow merely fringed his peril,
    How oft been spent for some stark maniac’s rage!
    Why not this once then for a happy soul,
    Why not for you, whereby long time to come
    You may be blest and blessing among men?
    You rob me nowise. What have I, what can I
    Accomplish? Speak! But you win much indeed,
    For envious are the gods, and it may chance
    The snipping shears o’ the jealous-minded Parcae
    May sever all too soon life’s golden cord
    The while their malice stretches out my span.
    Outstrip their will; give joy the unbroken length
    She meant should cling to pain. Do it forthwith!

KAN.

    No more of this! You know your worth to me,
    And if I turned a greybeard on the spot
    With drouthy lips and wither in my veins
    I’d borrow not the newer glow from you.

GYGES.

    Nay, e’en in this your prime the bid were fruitless,
    For if my blood with yours could be immingled,
    For all its heat ’twere left but what it is.

KAN.

    At this late hour you’re shaken in the mind
    And know not what you say and what you do.

GYGES.

    Forgive me, Sire!

KAN.

                       Good faith, I chide you not!
    Mere reel of head like that from winy fumes,
    A cooling breath of morn will blow it hence!
    (_As he goes_) Such is at least my hope, and such I’ll see.

                                                                [_Exit._

GYGES.

    Why did I let the ring go back? I should have
    Evanished, nevermore be seen of men;
    Thus could I ever be about her, thus
    Could see her as the gods alone may see her;
    For this or that they hold as private hoard,
    One charm of beauty to herself unknown,
    One brightness in the deepest solitude,
    One last, one utter mystery of spell
    That lives for them and now would live for me.
    ’Tis true I would not cheat them of revenge
    Should I take stolen sippings from the chalice
    That for them only brims and sparkles o’er;
    The air with sudden bruit would soon be ringing
    And Helios, at the inciting beckon of flame
    From wrathful Aphrodite all afired,
    Would launch on me the most unerring arrow
    Of all the unerring store his quiver bears.
    Then would I reel from life, but that were naught,
    For with the rattle at throat I’d clasp the ring,
    Once more to turn it, abject at her feet;
    And all her soul, as mine sank to its ebbing,
    I’d suck into my parched self from her glances,
    Upyielding thus my latest gasp of breath.

                           [THOAS _enters with_ LESBIA, _who is veiled_.

THOAS.

    The King sends Gyges, as his honoured favourite,
    The beauteous slave that pleases him right well.

GYGES.

    The King will have me for his mirth; such usage
    I’ve earned not at his hands, nor will endure.

THOAS.

    ’Tis true the gift is rich and of the rarest,
    But doubt not of the King’s sincere intent.

GYGES.

    Peace, densest loon among all densest loons,
    The King’s “sincere intent” is grossest mock.

THOAS.

    Open your mouth, my girl, and say’t yourself
    If he can’t trust me when I open mine.

GYGES (_to_ LESBIA).

    Girl, girl--no word!

THOAS.

                      You spurn the gift o’ the King?

GYGES.

    Yes!

THOAS.

        Gyges! Well, well, _you_ know what you do!

GYGES.

    The King kills me, and now to pay the body
    For life, he thrusts a jewel in its hand!

THOAS.

    I know not what you mean, and will announce
    What I have heard.  (_To_ LESBIA.) So come you back with me.

LESBIA (to GYGES).

    You’ll see me not a second time. Forgive
    That I have spoken, though indeed it sounds
    So roughly in your ears.

GYGES.

                     Nay, sweetest child,
    But place yourself behind yon platanus
    And speak as now--some love-lorn boy will cry,
    “A nightingale that speaks as well as sings!”

LESBIA.

    You are no boy.

GYGES.

                      Nay, nay, I’m not so much;
    You see that well. ’Tis true I had a notion,
    A thought I’m not the weakest hand at weapons,
    That I’d done thus and thus, and none could ever
    Get nipping at my ears without his buffet;
    And, if by just the twist of luck a better
    Were absent, I’d be called in danger’s hour.
    But those are boyish dreams--the lash to the booby
    For tippling wine i’ the night!

LESBIA.

                           First bring to me
    A bough of laurel-tree, then will I lash you
    And after weave for you the wreath.

GYGES.

                                And so
    You shared my dream? Maybe then it was true,
    And yet the mock!

LESBIA.

             The mock? Where is the mock?

GYGES.

    Stand _you_ not there?

LESBIA.

                         Oh, cruel!

GYGES.

                                    Not so, not so,
    In truth not so!

LESBIA.

            You’ve killed ere now a many;
    Have you e’er brought one to his re-awakening?

GYGES.

    You are most fair--Ay, verily, a blend
    Of lily and of rose that in their plot
    Make variant weft of hues, by pranksome winds
    In such a juggling mingle set to swaying
    There’s not an eye can sift the shades apart.
    Now you are red, now pale--and lo, you’re neither,
    You’re both at once!

LESBIA.

                What know you, then, of me?
    _That_ was your dream; I look far otherwise--
    See and recoil!

                                        [_She offers to unveil herself._

GYGES (_preventing her_).

    No, no.

LESBIA (_to_ THOAS).

                Back to the Queen!
    (_To_ GYGES.) She gave me not away in joy, she’ll take
    Me gladly back again.

GYGES.

                  Then say to her
    I have not cast one look upon your face.

LESBIA.

    Oh, insult!

GYGES.

                 Nay, you know I spied at you
    How often yesterday; till then I ne’er
    Had seen you.

LESBIA.

        Then, it seems, I ever
    Was at some childish trick. Oh, I am ashamed
    I marked it not till now; and yet the others
    Deserve the blame for all their teasing pranks.

GYGES.

    I only saw what charmed me.

LESBIA.

                              Surely so,
    For that which charms we love beneath a veil.
    Come, come, old man!

GYGES.

                 And wherefore hasten so?
    I am your lord, but tremble not at me;
    I ask of you one service, only one,
    Which granted you may leave.

LESBIA (_to_ THOAS).

    Then go alone.

GYGES.

    Stay, stay! But no. Present the King my thanks.
    I take his present; how I do it honour
    I’ll give him proof.

THOAS.

                ’Tis good.

                                                                [_Exit._

LESBIA.

                         And now the service?

GYGES.

    You’ll tarry long enough to make your smiling
    Come back to you.

LESBIA.

             That will not happen soon.

GYGES.

    And meantime while the hour in talk with me.
    You tend the Queen’s own person--there’s no taste
    No faintest in the peach you have not brought,
    Tell me of her.

LESBIA.

           Of her?

GYGES.

                    I only mean----
    Well, if you will, of something else--the garden
    In which she wanders--or about the flowers
    She loves the most to pluck--of yourself too;
    I’m fain to hear’t--Where are you like each other?
    Tell me at once and win my smiles at once!
    In stature? Nay, not quite; far less in form,
    But, for amends, your hair is black like hers
    But not so full--hers creeps about her face,
    Fringing it as the night the evening star.
    What else have you of hers?

                                [LESBIA _makes an involuntary movement_.

                                Nay, nay--stand still.
    In gait she’s none but she; when you go stepping
    ’Tis seen your trend is hitherward or thither,
    You swerve to the lure o’ the date or else the spring;
    But when she moves we cast our upward eyes
    Upon the Heaven, to see if Helios
    Will set the golden sun-car earthward dipping
    To lift her in, and companied with her
    Trample his path through all Eternity!

LESBIA.

    Yes, she is fair.

GYGES.

                      And why the downward eyelids?
    Come, pretty maid, uplift them, for methinks
    They rain her very fire.

LESBIA (_with a dry sobbing laugh_).

                            That well may be
    In such an hour!

GYGES.

                    My words have caused you pain?

LESBIA.

    I laughed, I think--and now have leave to go.

GYGES.

    But not without a gift; yes, sweetest child,
    I’d have you think on Gyges still with loving,
    I own he’s rough and deals the unwary wound
    Full oft, and not least often with the tongue,
    But never has he left one yet unhealed.

                                                     [_Enter_ KANDAULES.

KAN.

    Well?

GYGES.

         Sire, your coming fits the nick of time.

KAN.

    Then here must be two happy souls to find.

GYGES.

    Not yet, but soon; (_to_ LESBIA) I pray you, give your hand!
    How tender ’tis, how hard of grain is mine,
    How scarry-seamed from sword and dart! To match them--
    Fie, an ill thought! On this a rose’s leaf,
    A crumpled nothing, must imprint a pang,
    On mine the sharpest thorn goes bent and blunt;
    Yours twitches as a gyve were smithied round it.
    Child, have no fear! I do not grip you thus
    Because I wish to stay you. The King knows
    I grasp not merely his express word’s meaning,
    I’m quick as well i’ the uptake of his hint.
    He saw with pain that Nature has for you
    So much achieved, and naught that hussy Luck;
    He bids me succour you and fill Luck’s office.
    I do so (_releasing her_) and herewith declare you free!

LESBIA.

    They say that liberty’s a noble boon;
    I know it not, being snatched as child for spoil,
    And yet one must give thanks for noble boons,
    So for my liberty I give you thanks.

GYGES.

    Are you contented, Sire?

KAN.

                              I’m thunderstruck!

GYGES (_to_ LESBIA).

    And since it seems you know not where your mother
    Weeps yearning tears, or where your sire’s house stands
    Enter, until you find it, into mine,
    ’Tis yours; I’ll rob it only of my sword.

                                                         [_Exit_ LESBIA.

KAN.

    What means this, Gyges?

GYGES.

                         Sire, my thanks that you
    Have wished me bring this work to the rounding finish;
    Yet yours it stays to the end.

KAN.

                             You wish, it seems,
    To see just once the Heraclid aroused;
    Then have a care, his sleep is not so sound!

GYGES.

    Can I to-day offend you?

KAN.

                              No--forgive!
    But go forthwith and take from out my hoard
    Double the measure of your squandered present.
    Your deed has vexed me, and it hurts me still.

GYGES.

    Be gracious if I cannot meet your wish.
    Such trash is changed like magic to a load,
    And when, with all this gold and precious stones,
    The beauteous slave-girl came to swell the treasure,
    I used the slender whiteness of her neck
    And hung thereon the precious vanities.
    I can employ naught further than my sword,
    But if you will be gracious unto me
    Make me a present of your foemen’s heads;
    I’ll make their tale complete to the very last.

KAN.

    O Gyges, you are other than you were!

GYGES.

    I am so, Sire.

KAN.

                    You love!

GYGES.

                           You saw that maiden?
    I could have hewn her piecemeal! Do I love?

KAN.

    You love Rhodope!

GYGES.

                   Sire, ’tis only this--
    I cannot serve you more.

KAN.

                       Go, if you must.
    It grieves me, but I dare not now refuse you,
    And since you will not take a gift from me
    I cannot keep a present of your making.
    Here is your ring.

GYGES.

               Give me your sword instead.

KAN.

    I thank you that you show such noble mind.

                                                      [_Is about to go._

GYGES.

    There’s something yet (_takes a jewel from his breast_)--this
          (_proferring it_).

KAN.

                     Why, what----

GYGES.

                               Well you know it.

KAN.

    Rhodope’s diamond!

GYGES.

                    I took the thing,
    From there upon her neck--forgive the deed!
    It is atoned.

KAN.

            Is this your hand, Erinnyes?
    Oh, verily ye are most light of sleep!

GYGES.

    You’re bitter ’gainst me.

KAN.

                               No, not you. Farewell,
    But never must we see each other more.

                                                                [_Exit._

GYGES.

    Never! I go forthwith. Then where’s the goal?
    Come, come--what was my quest before this Lydian
    Countered my path? Forgot so soon? Why no!
    There was the lure that drew me to old Nile
    Where men with yellow skins and slitten eyes
    Build for dead monarchs everlasting houses.
    Then ho for the old road! I’ll give a spell
    To some poor wretch down there who’s wearied out.




ACT III


RHODOPE’S _chamber_. HERO _and other slave-girls occupied
    in arranging the room._ _Enter_ RHODOPE.

RHODOPE.

    Why are these mirrors round the walls unveiled?

HERO.

    The mirrors, Queen?

RHOD.

                       The mirrors. And these doors
    So wide ajar--whose work is this?

HERO.

                                     You love
    To have your outlook towards the sunlit morning
    And draw into your lungs its freshening breath.

RHOD.

    Who tells you that? Enough--To with their bolts!
    Turn every mirror round!

                    [HERO _shuts the doors and turns round the mirrors_.

                         My soul, ’tis true!
    Vain, vain the salve of flattering persuasion
    That I have duped my senses. Turn thee, Night,
    And pall me in the dunnest of thy veils!
    I am defiled as never yet was woman.

HERO.

    This rose at least you will not all despise;
    Ere the sun’s self had risen I plucked it for you,

RHOD.

    Away! Too soon it withers at my touch!

HERO.

    My name is Hero and not Lesbia.

                                     [_She retires with her companions._

RHOD.

    Eternal gods, could this thing come to pass?
    How many a time has my pure infant-hand
    Yielded your due of pious sacrifice!
    For you the first lock fell from off my head
    Ere yet I guessed the source of every blessing
    That prospers men was held within your hand.
    Nor was the virgin ever slow to tend
    Your service; rarely sent her altar-flame
    A twinned desire toward your lofty seat,
    Nay, every wish that threatened rise she strove
    To crush in shame and anguish to the depths
    Beneath her conscious thought; for she would win
    Only your benison and not your bounty,
    She would but thank, naught would she supplicate.
    The Woman, too, needed no ghostly dream
    Like that which smote the Tyndarid with horror,
    To monish her of duty’s holy bond;
    She came herself and decked the altar round
    And yet--why dedicates a mortal man
    To you the choicest part of all his goods
    If ye show not the gracious will to shield
    When he himself no more has power to shield?
    A man repels the lion with his sword
    When, by the goad of rage or hunger driven,
    He flashes rampant at the midday heat;
    No brave man calls on Zeus to hurl his bolts,
    But ward against the base snake’s crept surprisal
    When he is steeped in calm war-weary slumber;
    There is your work; to you belongs the night.
    And I--and I--rests then a curse on me,
    A curse from ancient time that holds your power
    Bounden in Styx, that god-affront so heinous
    There’s none would even dare it on a slave-girl
    The meanest of my train, falls on myself
    Sanctioned by you like a god-fearing deed?

                                                          [_Enter_ HERO.

HERO.

    The King!

RHOD.

             So soon? ’Tis death that comes with him!
    Then good; it palls me in the night of nights
    Whereof the earthly night is but a shade.
    Why tremble, then? It was my very wish.

                                                     [_Enter_ KANDAULES.

KAN.

    Do you forgive?

RHOD.

                  Sire, you can do no other,
    The appointed hour is now. Why this much asking?

KAN.

    I understand you not.

RHOD.

                        Be open, King!
    You find me ready.

KAN.

                        Ready! To what end?

RHOD.

    I know your duty and I give you thanks
    You’re bent on swift fulfilment; of a truth
    It must be mine were you of tardy will.
    You’ve searched, tracked down, and taken instant vengeance,
    It breaks out from your looks--now comes my turn!

KAN.

    Where do your strayed wits tend?

RHOD.

                                   Are you not come
    For vengeance hither?

KAN.

                     No, by all the gods!

RHOD.

    And all have life that yesterday had life?

KAN.

    Why not?

RHOD.

           There’s many may have done foul crime.

KAN.

    I know of none.

RHOD.

                  And what then brings you here?

KAN.

    Should yesternight absolve my right of coming?
    Have you then changed? Did you not e’en refuse
    The solitary kiss for which I begged
    As though you sat, the lily in your hand,
    Beneath the plane as in the olden time?

RHOD.

    You’ll live to thank me for it.

KAN.

                                    Nay, but fear not.
    True, I was drawn to you as on the morning
    After our wedding; but a hint, a wave
    Of hand, and I am gone even as I came.
    Ay, swifter from your presence would I hasten
    Than if in search of drink I neared a fountain
    With noiseless tread, and in the very act
    Espied a shrinking Naiad leave her bath.

RHOD.

    Remain!

KAN.

             No--not a breathing-span’s delay,
    If it distress you; and it does distress,
    I feel it deep. This is the hour for that
    Which has been christened in your lovely phrase
    Your “inmost self-communing.” I will not
    Sully its sanctitude. Though Aphrodite,
    Kind-smiling on this oversoon approach,
    Threw me for your delight the golden girdle
    She never gives away and scarcely lends,
    I’d come some other time and hand it you.

RHOD.

    No more. That sounds too sweet and gives me fear;
    For aye my nurse would tell me, “When a man
    Draws near his wife with over-fond approach
    Be sure he’s done her feelings secret hurt.”

KAN.

    There too I’m touched. I’ve done your feelings hurt.
    I know your nature and as well I know
    You cannot change your ways. Your father rules
    Where Greek and Indian manners are immingled;
    Your veil’s a portion of your Being’s self,
    Yet must I ever pull and pluck at it
    And would have wrenched it bodily yesterday.
    Come then, I rue it, and I swear to you--
    This drove me here--’twill not be done again.

                                                      [RHODOPE _laughs_.

    For ne’er I longed as now that I might ward
    Not just the grief that burrows to the bone
    And leaves its scars to sharp the after-sting,
    Nay, but to scare the tiniest shadow hence
    That might o’ercast your soul with its annoy,
    Though such a shadow’s source should be myself.
    I will watch o’er you as the trusty lashes
    Watch o’er your eye; down comes their latch and bars
    Not only sand-grains but the sunny beam
    When over-ardent and too swiftly come.

RHOD.

    Too late! Too late!

KAN.

                        What is too late, dear wife?

RHOD.

    I--No, I will not say it--I cannot say it;
    Mayhap he’ll guess it, and if he should guess,
    I’ll seek my knees, dumb, stripped of speech before him,
    Pointing upon his sword-blade and my breast.

KAN.

    Some dream has given you fright?

RHOD.

                                   A dream? Oh no!
    None was to waste on me; warning was lost
    On my poor worth. The stone in crashing fall
    May have its shadow for the eye to mark,
    The sudden sword its flash, but on my head--
    Kandaules, speak! I see--you wish a question!
    Then question and be done!

KAN.

                         I? Yes--why, yes!
    But more than all--your hand!

RHOD.

    Withhold your touch! No water rids you of the ’filing
    spot.

KAN.

    O Gyges!--Come, since thus your hand’s refused me--
    (And without that your cheek tells tale enough).
    You’re hot with fever; but the goodliest leech
    Stands at the door. Why is it barred and bolted
    When such a morn as all the trooping hours
    Lade with their sweets, beggar-like knocks outside?
    Quick, fling it back, and on the act you’re healed!

                                       [KANDAULES _is about to open it_.

RHOD.

    Halt! Ope more readily a charnel-vault!
    Not darklier-browed the stainless god o’ the sun
    Averts his face from shattered urns of death
    Than from the woman you have named your own.

KAN.

    Unhappy one!

RHOD.

                Speak! Was there in the chamber--
    Speak at all costs----!

KAN.

                      A murderer? No, why, no!
    Come, ask yourself now, would I not have slain him?

RHOD.

    Ay, if you saw him.

KAN.

                        And I must have seen him.
    The lamp had scarce been lit a moment since
    And brightly burned.

RHOD.

                  ’Twould seem so--yet I heard
    A many various stirrings. Not from you
    Nor yet from me they came.

KAN.

                         The night is rife
    With echoes and with startling curious noises
    And sleepless ears hear much.

RHOD.

                           There was a rustling.

KAN.

    A worm i’ the wall!

RHOD.

                      A clink as of a sword
    Grazing on something.

KAN.

                    Maybe. Where’s the tone
    That Nature, in a fit of mimic fun,
    Has not embodied in some drollish beast
    To serve a voice’s turn? If you’ll but tear
    Your robe in two and mark the sound, I’ll tell
    What insect-buzz it is to the very life.

RHOD.

    I heard a sighing, too.

KAN.

                            What, sighs from murderers?

RHOD.

    No, no! And there’s the rub.

KAN.

                                 ’Twas the cool night-wind.
    About your cheeks and mouth it would be playing
    And sighed at breaking only on the walls.
    I tell you there are trees that, like the stone
    Which drinks the light of day and waits for darkness
    To give it back, steep them in sounds and echoes,
    And thus they babble, sing, and moan at night.

RHOD.

    You take it so? But wait--I’ve lost a dainty----

KAN.

    A precious stone perhaps? A diamond?
    This one?

RHOD.

        You have it--You?

KAN.

                           Who else? See there!

RHOD.

    Thanks, everlasting thanks, ye gods! Forgive
    The doubting of a heart whose innocence
    Misdeemed her trod and torn. Oh, ye are near
    As light and air!

KAN.

                Erinnyes, down, you hounds!
    There! (_giving her the jewel_).

RHOD.

    Take it to the temple-hoard! I owe
    The gracious gods thank-offering opulent,
    And chiefly Her, All-Linker of earth’s love.
    From golden baskets shall her doves be given,
    To-day and ever, softest grains for picking;
    From marble beakers shall they quench their thirst;
    And you, Kandaules, you----

KAN.

                          The youth will kiss,
    When thinking of his maiden, his own hand
    She pressed for greeting ere she took farewell;
    The man needs something more.

RHOD.

                           O happy day!
    You hold your wife so dear? Ah, then I beg you
    Forgive my close-hugged wrong. I inly fretted
    ’Twas pride in the possession more than love
    Lay in the feeling that enchains you to me,
    And your heart’s leaning flame must have the grudge
    Of others, if it be not wholly quenched.
    I fear that now no more.

KAN.

                       And nevermore
    Shall come that fear on you. I know what thing
    Set canker at your heart. You thought your sway
    Trenched on by Gyges, and ’tis true enough
    I passed full many a day with him for comrade,
    And nigh turned huntsman since himself is one.
    Yet that touched not your privilege’s pale,
    For that whereby the man and man are bonded
    Is null for woman, needed at her side
    As little as the war-mood for a kiss.
    Yet though I could but name your fear a folly
    I spare no means to bring you speedy healing,
    For, hear my word--my favourite, Gyges, goes!

RHOD.

    What?

KAN.

          And to-day.

RHOD.

                    Impossible!

KAN.

                                 Would that
    Mislike you now? You seemed to wish it else.

RHOD.

    O fool, that this, in drunken rush of joy,
    I could forget!

KAN.

              Why, what?

RHOD.

                       Show me your hand!
    ’Twas he. He sudden stood before my eyes
    As though his outline, fiery-limned in air,
    Remained to trace him. Oh how terrible
    The tallying proof! Your hand! He has the ring.

KAN.

    It is my very own.

RHOD.

                     Speak, have you not
    At some time laid it by since you have worn it?
    Lost it or missed the thing some other way?

KAN.

    Unhappy soul!  Why make flesh quail with shadows?

RHOD.

    He shirks my test! You’re sending Gyges forth,
    And on the instant like a miscreant?
    And why?

KAN.

             I said not that. He goes himself.

RHOD.

    He goes himself? What drives him from among us?

KAN.

    I do not know, nor have I questioned him.

RHOD.

    You do not know? I’ll tell you then the wherefore,
    He’s done you viler shame than e’er was plotted
    And you must punish as you ne’er have punished.

KAN.

    Fie on those words, Rhodope! Past all doubt
    He’s noblest of the noble.

RHOD.

                        Is he so?
    How can you let him go without a tremor?

KAN.

    For this, that even the goodliest, all unwilling,
    May spread in place of blessing secret curse.

RHOD.

    Is that his case? And has himself then felt it?

KAN.

    Well, if not that--his heart looks high, he aims
    At large emprise, ay, and he dares the venture.

RHOD.

    You think that?

KAN.

                    There’s no throne too high for him,
    And if he goes and keeps his reasons hid--
    But mark me, crown in hand he’ll be returning,
    And tell us with a smile:--“This drove me forth.”

RHOD.

    Even so?

KAN.

             Dear wife, the night’s unnerved your mind,
    The fright----

RHOD.

            Maybe.

KAN.

                   You heard this here, that there----

RHOD.

    And naught to hear! Myself gives half belief,
    For, now I mind me, sight as well was false.
    You have not doffed the ring since wearing it,
    You have not lost it, did not find it gone--
    Yet still I had the thought--my glance was keen,
    And it was morning and I saw all else,
    ’Twas missing from your hand. So it would seem
    Sense tallies here with sense. The blinded eye
    Bears out the blunted ear. Then pardon me
    For giving you such hurt of heart, and grant
    An hour alone to balance my tossed mind.

                                         [KANDAULES _is about to speak_.

    ’Tis good, ay good! Forgive me, Sire, and go!

                                                       [_Exit_ KANDAULES.

RHOD.

    None other ’tis than Gyges--that is clear,
    And he has had the ring--that is still clearer,
    The King suspects, must do so--that is clearest!
    He’s bound the appalling deed appallingly
    T’avenge on him, yet suffers him escape.
    Thereby one riddle needs another riddle
    To solve it; and ’tis like to mad my brain
    If it be kept in shroud. A husband sees
    His wife defiled--defiled?  Speak roundly--murdered!
    Murdered! Nay more, condemned herself to murder
    If this God-mocker pay not answering blood.
    The husband is a monarch, bears the sword
    Of Diké, nor need crave from the Erinnyes
    Her borrowed dagger; knows ’tis holy duty
    The hideous sin to punish, even if love
    Spur not revenge; is bound before the gods
    To yield their victim, if to me denied.
    And yet this husband, yet this monarch draws
    No sword, no dagger--lets the accursed fly!
    But that shall have its thwart; not more than he
    I lack for trusty servants; not as slave-girl,
    As royal daughter came I in this house,
    Ay, and my following was a royal one!
    I’ll summon them, old hearts of staunchest faith,
    And bid them baulk the runagate of flight;
    Then to Kandaules thus:-- “Lo, here am I;
    There is the favourite! Make your choice. This dagger
    Will pierce myself unless your sword pierce him!”

                                                        [_Enter_ LESBIA.

LESBIA.

    O Queen, do you forgive?

RHOD.

                              Why, what, my child?
    Your coming back to me? Do you, O you
    Forgive me that I could have let you from me.
    I seemed--myself I knew not what I did,
    And yet I seem to think the King had told me
    You went not loath; and ah, I had been forced
    That night, that night to make him such denial
    I’d not the heart to say another “no”!

LESBIA.

    Ah, then I’m free no more, and yet again
    May count myself among your waiting-maidens?

RHOD.

    Nay, nay! As sister lay you on my breast!

LESBIA.

    Why, what has passed? So moved I ne’er have seen you.

RHOD.

    A hideous thing, a thing that has no name,
    For when I come to name it, lo ’tis altered
    And looks a deathlier horror than before!
    Yea, Spawn of Night, that grins upon my eyes,
    Your first-shown face methinks I could have kissed
    Now that your second’s bared in doubtful dark.

LESBIA.

    Can I do aught for you? The question’s foolish,
    I feel it--yet----

RHOD.

                 My girl, you cannot murder,
    And he who cannot murder can for me
    Do nothing more----

LESBIA.

                 Oh, Sovereign Lady!

RHOD.

                                     ’Tis so.
    You fix me with wide eyes, you cannot grasp it
    That such a word should come from out my mouth.
    Yes, Lesbia, is it I, it is Rhodope
    That warned you maids so oft, and checked your motion
    To filch with meddling hand Death’s dismal office
    Though but a spider’s life were set at stake.
    I’ve not forgot it, but ’tis of the time
    When in fresh morning dew I laved my limbs
    And in the streams of sunshine basked them dry;
    But now I bay for blood, now naught of me
    Survives but what the gods will find is needful
    That to avenge which time long since I was!

LESBIA.

    Your Consort then knows naught? A vengeancer
    Can ne’er be lacking to the Queen of Lydia.

RHOD.

    It seems so--yet----Nay, I will know, and soon.
    Go, Lesbia, and call me Karna hither.

LESBIA.

    You mean I am to bear him word from you?

RHOD.

    That’s with the past.

LESBIA.

                       But--but--your veil--you’ll wish it!

RHOD.

    Nay, nay!

LESBIA.

            I shudder! Oh! ’Tis the first time.

                                                                [_Exit._

RHOD.

    The friend he cannot sacrifice; therefore
    He spares the wife. Else could he not endure it!

                                           [LESBIA _returns with_ KARNA.

    Karna, you know the oath that you had sworn
    What time your Lord, my King-descended Father,
    Gave you his daughter at the Golden Gate.
    Though still I sat upon my elephant,
    Though deeply I was shrouded in my veil,
    Yet well I noted everything that passed
    Nor have forgot one word that then you spoke.

KARNA.

    Nor I, and hope I’ll keep my faith’s account.

RHOD.

    Then search out Grecian Gyges, bear him word
    That I would see him.

KARNA.

                  You!

RHOD.

                        Bestir yourself
    Lest so he should escape. Set on his tracks
    If he has fled, and bring him here again.
    Ere night has come before me he must stand!

KARNA.

    I shall deliver him, alive or dead.

                                                                [_Exit._

LESBIA.

    Say what is this? You think ’tis Gyges?

RHOD.

                                               Gyges!

LESBIA.

    He’s done your feelings hurt?

RHOD.

                                   Done blasphemous insult
    Upon the Holiest, brought the heaviest curse
    From heaven upon my head, the selfsame curse
    Which all the gods are loath to set at launch
    Because it strikes alone the sinless man.
    ’Tis he that schools me murder.

LESBIA.

                           Never he!
    I swear it to you!

RHOD.

                How can you?

LESBIA.

                           O Queen,
    I too have had my lesson, and I know
    That he would rather sunder soul from body
    Than do you hurt.

RHOD.

               Even so?

LESBIA.

                          I have for you
    A word--his very message. Oh how bitter,
    How bitter pain this word brought when I heard it!
    Now ’tis half joy. I am to tell you from him
    He’s not so much as looked at me--He loves you!
    Now ask yourself--is’t possible?

RHOD.

                              He loves me!
    Then it is certain.

LESBIA.

               How?

RHOD.

                      Come tell me, fool!
    Can a man love what he has never seen?
    If Gyges saw me--say, when did he see me?

                                [LESBIA _puts her hand before her eyes_.

    Now say, as maiden, whether he must die!




ACT IV

_The Queen’s Apartment_. RHODOPE _alone_.


RHODOPE.

    Oh for one moment of oblivion!
    Why toss the riddle ever and forever?
    ’Tis solved--I know how soon! I should be busy
    Even as my maids who slack the drag of time
    By hearkening every tone and vying guesses
    Which bird it was that sang each note, and whether
    ’Twas red and whether green. Pah, what a din!
    Is Karna there with him? Still--all is still!
    ’Twas naught--I could have known. How am I altered!
    When other have I asked a sound its whence?
    I quailed at naught, I quailed not even before
    The glow of fire, all one to me how red
    It streamed at heaven, all one to me how threatening
    It spread its yawn of blaze; I knew a ring
    Of trusty watchers sightless round me set,
    I knew they gave the King’s beloved daughter
    Buckler of blood and bones. At last--a step!
    ’Tis they! Ha, Karna is as shrewd as valiant.
    Always I heard so; this day sees it proved.
    Not yet! Nor ever, maybe! Nay, ye gods,
    So hard of heart ye cannot be. My will
    Is never that you reach me out the hand
    To firm my footing on the abysm’s brink,
    My will is but to see who thrusts me down.
    The more I ply my thought the less my power
    To comprehend my lord. Sooth, I have heard
    From veriest youth that the polluted woman
    Is barred from life, and if through all the child
    It sent its shudders, now I have the ground
    For such a law; in my own heart I found it.
    She cannot live, ay and she wills it not!
    Has this for him alone no force, or will he
    Slay the Accursed stealthily in hopes
    Still to encloak from me his damned act?
    Be thanked, Eternal Ones, that too may be.
    If Karna then should find him flown and dead,
    Should find the poniard cold in his hot breast,
    I’ll know whose hand it was that struck him earthwards
    And nevermore shall ask where Gyges tarried.

                                                        [_Enter_ LESBIA.

LESBIA.

    O Queen, he comes!

RHOD.

                        I am prepared, and wait him.

LESBIA.

    And ranged behind him like a bolt of iron
    A weaponed troop snaps to and locks him tight.

RHOD.

    I can believe that Karna knows his work.

LESBIA.

    And must it be?

RHOD.

                        Or he or I; perchance
    Both at a sweep.

LESBIA.

            Oh, oh, you make me dumb!

RHOD.

    Bid Karna now send message to the King
    I beg him hither for a single word.

                                                         [_Exit_ LESBIA.

RHOD.

    Now, ye of Underneath, that put no outrage
    In check, and yet avenge each several one,
    Up, up, I say! Mount guard upon this hearth!
    Be certain here of bloody sacrifice.

                                         [GYGES _has meanwhile entered_.

GYGES.

    You sent to bid me to your presence, Queen.

RHOD.

    And you know why--you know it, for you tremble.
    Can you deny the word? Your colour alters,
    The heart that knocks your breast is plain to hear.

GYGES.

    Your lord--has he not, too, before you trembled?
    Has not his colour, even as mine, been altered?
    Has not his heart been stirred like mine and knocked?
    Recall the moment of the great permission,
    The first time that he dared behold your face,
    Then ask--did he not all resemble me?

RHOD.

    You?

GYGES.

        Queen, I mean my words. His brain was dimmed,
    He stood there in a dazzle, and as sense
    Returned upon him, utterance went dumb,
    And tearing crown from head as ’twere a wreath
    Turned to a sudden wither in his hair,
    He tossed it o’er his shoulder in disdain.

RHOD.

    He! Ah!

GYGES.

          You looked on him with kindly smile
    At this; then came on him such boldened heart
    He would have come anear by half a pace,
    But lo, his knees were loosened under him,
    They felt their homage owed a nobler service,
    And ere you guessed he lay before you--thus!

                                                         [_Kneels down._

RHOD.

    You dare?

GYGES.

            And what? Why thus it was. Scarce knowing
    Your act’s import, half with repelling motion,
    And half perchance with the uplifter’s gesture,
    You stretched the hand which, tentatively, shyly,
    He grasped; which then, e’en then, to tip of finger
    Was short--withdrawn or ere he came to touch.
    Did you not thus? Oh speak!

RHOD.

                         Rise, rise, I say!

GYGES (_rising_).

    But him it smote like the heaven’s thundery burst;
    He felt that he had been until that hour
    A shade of Erebus, cold, thinly-passioned,
    A mere estray among the Things of Life
    Quicked now with its first blood even as themselves.
    He felt that all their laughing, all their weeping,
    Their joying and their sighing--yea, their breathing
    He had but aped nor ever dreamt wherefore
    The breast of man forever swells and sinks.
    Then burned he with desire for equal life
    And sucked your darling image in with eyes
    That else glassed all with level apathy
    In changing drift, like a still sheet of water,
    And scarcely now forgave the lids their quiver.
    Thus as he lay before you drinking beauty
    He took the gradual glow of softened fire,
    Even as your own white hand what time at evening
    You hold it to a flame--ah, but you leapt
    Aback before your reddening countershine!

RHOD.

    No further!

GYGES.

              Ah, no further! Know I more?
    All that he felt I understand and feel,
    And that as full and flaming as himself.
    But how he wooed and how the quest was won,
    That is his mystery--one alone can have it
    And this sole one is he and never I.
    Now, then, you know why I was in a tremble,
    A shiver of rapture ’twas that held me gripped,
    A quake of holy dread that shook my frame
    When thus I stood so sudden in your sight
    And saw that Aphrodite has a sister.
    Now say--for what end have you summoned me?

RHOD.

    For death.

GYGES.

               How say you?

RHOD.

                             Is it not deserved?

GYGES.

    If you adjudge the doom--so must it be.

RHOD.

    And in this very hour.

GYGES.

                         I am prepared.

RHOD.

    Not seized with shudders such as come on all men,
    Such as must come on youth with double power?
    Think you perchance this is not bitter earnest
    Because a woman speaks your bloody sentence
    And you’ve ne’er yet known woman but as mother?
    Oh, do not hope that even the mildest-souled
    Will alter it. The murder she can pardon,
    Nay more, can for her murderer raise petition
    If he has deigned her so much remnant breath;
    Ay, but a shame, a blasting sacrilege
    That fills her from the crown to the toe top-full
    Of self-recoil--blood only blots that shame!
    The more whole woman else, mere shrinking woman,
    The more man bruises just that womanhood.

GYGES.

    Oh horror!

RHOD.

               Comes the shudder? Hear me out.
    Stood you not now before me judged and doomed,
    Guarded by shining swords before the door,
    And, if you will or not, sure sacrifice
    To Them of Underneath whom I’ve conjured,
    Then would I ope, though with reluctant hand,
    My very veins ere yet the sun had sunk
    And wash myself in my own lustral blood.
    For lo, the gods all stand with eyes avert
    Though with a pity filled; the golden threads
    Are snapped--those threads that knit me to the stars
    And held me upright. Direly draws the dust
    And if I wait and waver my new sister,
    The toad, hops cosily into my chamber.

GYGES.

    O Queen, there’s many a word that I could say,
    Much fouling sand could shake from out my locks
    That’s flown thereon but in the stress of storm.
    I will not do it. Believe but this alone--
    Now, now, I see what I have done, and yet
    It scarce was done before I felt the urge
    To make atonement. If your lord, the King,
    Had stood not in the path that points to Orcus
    I long had been a shadow among shadows
    And you been cleansed if yet unrecompensed.

RHOD.

    My lord baulked your intent although he knew----

GYGES.

    ’Twas naught. The unwonted crisis that beset him
    Cost me the service of a free-willed death
    But did not cheat you of your sacrifice.
    Farewell; there’ll be no sword of yours unclean.

RHOD.

    Stay--not by your own hand nor yet by murder,
    But by your paramount arbiter you fall.
    The King comes speedily to fix your fate.

GYGES.

    To dying men, no matter who they be,
    One last request is granted free. You will
    Be loath t’ abridge my dead man’s beggar-right,
    I know you cannot do it. Then let me go!

                                  [RHODOPE _makes a gesture of refusal_.

    I have done all that in me lay. Then come
    What is to come. I bear no whit of blame.

                                                     [_Enter_ KANDAULES.

RHOD. (_to_ KANDAULES).

    I did not err. There was i’ the sleeping chamber
    A man concealed.

GYGES.

             Yes, King--the truth that I
    But shadowed to you since the courage broke
    To make confession. Now the veil is raised
    And worthy death I stand before you here.

KAN.

    Gyges!

GYGES.

         Even so. With both these eyes of mine
    I did a nameless thing such as my hands here
    Could never overpass, could never equal,
    Though I should draw the sword on you and her.

RHOD.

    ’Tis so.

GYGES.

            In sooth I knew not, ay, can swear it.
    Women to me are strange; but as the boy
    Thrusts at some wondrous bird a clutching hand
    Rough with its crush, because its tender nature
    He knows not, though his will was to caress,
    E’en so I brought the Jewel of this world
    To ruin, all unwitting what I did.

RHOD.

    His word is noble. Woe to him and me
    That it is vain!

GYGES.

             When the Castalian fount,
    Which god-delighting men have for their drinking,
    And which from shuttling colours takes a glance
    As though culled blossoms from a rainbow-garden
    By Iris’ very hands thereon were strown,
    When in this fount, that from Parnassus springs,
    A troubling stone is flung, it falls to boiling
    And starts in wheeling turmoil hilly-high.
    Then sings no more on earth the nightingale
    Nor evermore the lark, and in the heights
    A dumbness holds the Muses’ holy choir,
    And never knows the harmony returning
    Till a grim stream wraps the foolhardy flinger
    Gnashing him down into its lightless deeps.
    Thus is it also with a woman’s soul.

KAN.

    Gyges, I am no villain!

GYGES.

                         Lord, you are
    Rhodope’s husband, shield and shelter both,
    And must be her avenger.

KAN.

                       More than all
    I’m Man, and for the sacrilege myself
    Committed, suffer no man else to die.

GYGES.

    King, what is saved by this?

KAN.

                                 Myself.

GYGES.

                                       He raves;
    Give him no hearkening ear.

RHOD.

                         My Lord and Consort,
    What word was that? I scarce believe myself
    If you repeat it not.

KAN.

                    You speak for me.
    You shall not plead excuse for me--you shall
    Tell all just as it came.

RHOD.

                      ’Tis so? Ye gods,
    Be merry! I have railed, yet knew not _this_.

KAN.

    Speak, Gyges.

                                                                [_Exit_.

GYGES.

              Queen, if you but had the knowledge
    How he extolled you ever, and how dull,
    How brutish dull, each flaming word I heard
    Because the birds that from the bushes rustled
    Scaping my arrow’s range the while he spoke
    Allured my eyes--if you should tell yourself
    How sorely such a listless childlike bearing
    He took for signal of a hid mistrust
    And a half-given belief, although it sprang
    From vagrant mood--how sore it must have stung him;
    Had you but seen us both--nay only once,
    When side by side we roamed and loitered on
    Amid the forest, he in all his glow,
    I in my chill indifference staring stockish
    For coloured pebbles scattered on the earth
    The while his fingers pointed to a sunrise;
    Oh! sure I know your look again were mild,
    For he was like a priest in whom a flame
    Irradiant burns, and who, his god to honour,
    Would kindle it within another’s bosom,
    And when o’ermastered, passionately heedless
    He bares of veil the Holy Mysteries
    That stupored senses thus more swiftly waken
    And idols false meet surer disenthronement,
    Fails he so sore that he be not reprieved?

RHOD. _(with a gesture of repulse_).

    He gave his right of husband to your keeping?

GYGES.

    Name it not thus!

RHOD.

                      No need then at your wine
    To seize upon his hand and in the act
    To draw therefrom the ring, as I had thought it--
    He gave you back the ring himself; you came,
    Perchance so bold, along with him?

GYGES.

                               How can
    Your heart believe it, Queen?

RHOD.

                           Your years are youthful--
    Your thought’s too noble----

GYGES.

                         Was I then his villein,
    And has he e’er required that such I be?
    Nay, nay, O Queen, nothing extenuate;
    Your word of doom stands fast; and deem it not
    A heartless word, ’tis mild. I took the way
    That deep I feel I never should have taken,
    But I have borne my curse with me as well.
    I was grown ripe for death because I knew
    That every good which life can e’er bestow
    Was squandered waste, and if it chanced that night
    I found him not, and o’er the hearth’s pollution
    My swift-let blood poured not its cleansing wash,
    The blame is not on me--I courted him.
    Oh, had I borne my purpose through and dared him,
    Naught but an echo in your soul would now
    Recall a dying shudder at the murderer
    And make your breathing all the sweetlier drawn!
    Ay, but your lord had stood revealed as saviour
    Nor ever been before so fiery-kissed.

RHOD.

    And things had happened that would fearfully
    Uplift the veil and show us that the gods
    Lean not upon the arm of man for vengeance,
    When such a guilt as never finds atonement,
    Being a thing of darkness, stains the world.
    But they are gracious, for this hell-deed has
    In vain enwrapped itself in utter blackness;
    ’Spite all, it blazes through. Water will seek
    No fiery transmutation when the mouth
    Of thirst is stretched to drink it, nor will fire
    Wane in extinction when the breath of hunger
    Blows o’er it on the hearthstone--nay, oh nay,
    The elements need not to tell the tidings
    That Nature to her wrathful depths is fevered
    Since in a woman she has suffered hurt.
    We know the thing that happed!

GYGES.

                           We know as well
    What is to happen still. Only forgive!

                                                      [_Is about to go._

RHOD.

    Stop! That no more!

GYGES.

                       What other can I do?

RHOD.

    You must now slay him.

GYGES.

                                      Ha!

RHOD.

                                          You must--and I----
    I must thereafter be your wife.

GYGES.

                            O Queen!

RHOD.

    Now go.

GYGES.

          What, slay him?

RHOD.

                           When you say to me,
    “You are a widow now,” I answer you
    “You are my husband now.”

GYGES.

                       Have you not seen
    How he departed hence, not for himself
    Spoke any word, but gave the charge to me?
    And I--I am to----No!

RHOD.

                    You must do this
    As I must make demand. We both can make
    No question if the task be hard or light.

GYGES.

    But if he were not husband he is friend,
    None stands his better there. And can I kill him
    For being friend in all too dear degree?

RHOD.

    YOU struggle still, but all in vain.

GYGES.

                                       What should
    Compel me if your charm could not compel?
    I love you; I am strange-subdued as though
    I came to earth seized with a stiffening cramp
    That bent to suppleness before your gaze.
    My senses, erewhile numb like drowséd watchmen,
    Had never seen nor heard; now they arouse
    Each other’s life, o’ermastered with their bliss
    And clambering upon you; round about you
    All forms are merged and melted, once so sharp
    And boldly-lined they almost tore the eye
    Like clouds before the radiant lines of morning,
    And like a dizzied man who sees the abysm
    And fears the sucking fall, I could outstretch
    My hand for yours, yea, cling around your neck
    Ere gulped into unbottomed nothingness.
    But with no drop, no smallest, of his blood
    Could I be won to buy that loftiest seat--
    In rapture’s maddest height I’d not forget him!

RHOD.

    ’Tis true you can refuse what I desire--
    Then leave me!

GYGES.

           Queen, what’s in your heart?

RHOD.

                                         A work
    Of silent resolution and more silent
    Fruition--Go!

GYGES.

          You mean--you mean-----

RHOD.

                                Perchance.

GYGES.

    You could?

RHOD.

                Misdoubt it not. I can and will.

GYGES.

    Now by the gods who hold their thrones aloft
    And the Erinnyes, Listeners of the Depths,
    That may not be and ne’er shall come to pass!

RHOD.

    Ho, thus you speak?

GYGES.

                      You’ll wake me out of slumber--
    Tell me you will--when he appears in dreams
    And mocks his death-wound, ever, ever smiling
    Till my hair starts on end?

RHOD.

                          No more! No more!

GYGES.

    And you will press a kiss upon my lips,
    That in my anguish come no sudden stab
    To tell me why I did it--You turn away
    As though the very thought set you to shudders?
    Swear first that oath!

RHOD.

                    I swear to be your wife.

GYGES.

    Pah! Why the question? I’m not conqueror yet.

RHOD.

    It means a combat then?

GYGES.

                           A combat, Queen.
    You hold me not so light to think I’d murder?
    I challenge him to fight unto the death.

RHOD.

    And if you fall?

GYGES.

                    Send no curse after me,
    I can naught else.

RHOD.

                Do I not fall with you?

GYGES.

    But if I come again?

RHOD.

                          Beside the altar
    You find me, and prepared for either chance,
    Prepared as well to lay my hand in yours
    As grasp the dagger and dissolve the bond
    That holds me knit unto the conqueror
    If it be he.

GYGES.

         Before the sun is sunk
    It is decided. Then farewell.

RHOD.

                           Farewell--
    And if it give you joy learn one thing more:--
    You never had allured me from my home
    To wrong me thus.

GYGES.

              Rhodope! Ah, you feel it?
    That means I had known hotter jealousy
    And keener envy, had been given more
    To fear, since I’m a lesser man than he.
    And yet it gives me joy that thus you feel,
    And is enough for me, more than enough.

                                                                [_Exit._

RHOD.

    Now bridal garb and deathly shroud--come on!

             [LESBIA _rushes in and throws herself at_ RHODOPE’S _feet_.

LESBIA.

    O Gracious One--forgive!  My thanks, my thanks!

RHOD. (_lifting her up_).

    I think you will not thank me, hapless child,
    Yet--in the end! Yes, Lesbia, in the end!




ACT V


SCENE 1

_Enter_ KANDAULES, THOAS _following_.

KANDAULES.

    Where’er I go you’re hard at heels. What would you?
    No heart to open speech with me, old man,
    Because I was a trifle rough with you?
    Speak--on with what you’d say. I’ll keep my soul
    In patience and give ear though you should need
    The length of time that turns a grape from green
    Into the purple ere you’ve reached the end.

THOAS.

    Sire, have I ever yet accused a man?

KAN.

    No, Thoas.

THOAS.

             Have I slurred a man’s good name?

KAN.

    Why, surely not.

THOAS.

                 Or picked up heated words,
    Such as wroth lips are like to drop on earth,
    To fling them in your ear and fan their flame?

KAN.

    Never.

THOAS.

         Good; then I know at seventy years
    I’ll not do what I have not done at twenty,
    Since more than fifty years I’ve served your house.

KAN.

    I know it, trusty henchman.

THOAS.

                             Earth brings forth
    And ceases not, all one to her if kings
    Be slain or crowned. She suffers not the trees
    To wither out nor berries to run sapless,
    And none the more she holds her fountains back
    If one should chance to give her blood for drink.

KAN.

    That’s true as well.

THOAS.

                      Ay, true. All would remain
    As now, I think, so far as touches me.
    For there’s the luck of slaves like us, that we
    Fret little at a red moon in the heavens,
    And that more coolly than the greedy dogs
    Waiting in hope for tit-bits they may snap,
    We watch the sacrifice nor ask in dread
    If there be good or evil prophesied.

KAN.

    Greybeard, what would you say?

THOAS.

                                 Your father had me
    Always about him, none the less if he
    Went banqueting than if he took the field;
    I dared not be remiss, to-day I reached
    His goblet and to-morrow shield and spear.
    I too it was prepared his funeral-pyre
    And gathered up with my old stiffened fingers
    His handful of white dust in the brown urn,
    For such was his behest--and why was this?

KAN.

    The grape is turned to red by now.

THOAS.

                                    You’re like him,
    Maybe--I’ve ne’er yet seen you draw the sword.
    He drew it oft and gladly, nor at times
    With any ground, I grant it if you will,
    And yet ’twas good, maybe you’re fully like him;
    God give his fate be yours.

KAN.

                           Is it not mine?

THOAS.

    Who knows? I reckon in its end as well.
    Forgive me, Sire; I have a laggard brain,
    An understanding slow, and dull device,
    Who calls me fool insults me not thereby.
    But sturdy men have come to me ere now
    To seek advice, and when I hemmed and hawed
    They said to me:--“The simplest aged man
    Who counts his seventy years and keeps his senses
    Has greater wisdom in a hundred things
    Than even the shrewdest who is still a youth.”
    Well, then, I think I keep my senses still,
    So hearken to me.

KAN.

                Why, I do.

THOAS.

                        And ply not
    The rack for reasons. Be not overhasty
    To think me wrong, although I shut my lips,
    Because a “why” of thus and thus much drams
    Is lacking me when you would weigh my word.
    It’s true enough, if birds refuse to fly
    As pleases you, when questioned by your seer,
    That you can launch a single shot from bow
    And scatter them, as many have done in wrath.
    But does the ill-luck they portended come
    The less for that? Then do not say to me,
    “What would you? He is valiant, good, and true!”
    I know’t myself, nay more--would swear the same,
    Yet all the more I speak my warning word:--
    Be on your guard with Gyges!

                                                    [KANDAULES _laughs_.

                                Ah, I thought it.
    I tell you once again--be on your guard!
    Yet take my words aright. I say as well
    He’ll never stretch his hand to grasp your crown,
    He’ll spend his very latest drop of blood
    In your defence, and yet he is for you
    More dangerous than all who yesterday
    With looks and words were hatching to your hurt
    Their plots. Oho, they’ll never do you harm
    As long as he’s not here. Then get his riddance
    Soon as you can, for if he bides much longer
    And, wearing all the garlands he has won,
    Goes up and down among them as he does,
    There’s much can happen.

KAN.

                      That means?

THOAS.

                               Why, I see it.
    They whisper and compare, they shrug their shoulders,
    And clenching fists, have a sly nod with each other.
    You’ve given them all too sore offence, and if
    The Greek should feel some morning when he wakens
    His step go sudden-stumbling o’er a crown
    Set by some hand at night to catch his feet,
    Should he still spurn it?--Is the man a fool?
    He does not rob you of it, that’s enough.
    Your heir he can be and your heir he will be,
    His stars ascend, you do not dream how high,
    Else would they mock him for a zither-twanger
    And they’d believe, as I myself believe,
    That only birds possess the songful throat
    Whose claws are clipped by shears that know their work,
    But now they deem him, since he’s apt at song,
    If not yet Phoebus’ self, at least his son.

KAN.

    That mazes you? Why, he has conquered them.
    How could sheer mortal be their conqueror?

THOAS.

    Still, still! Yet this much stands, he’s good and true.
    Then hear my words and all may yet go well
    Unless the gods should send a chastisement
    And you next year make them and us at one.

                                                         [_Enter_ GYGES.

    He comes. Was this vain talk? Sire, do not smile.
    ’Tis just on walls saltpetre-crystals form,
    Then wherefore not the salt o’ the time on me?

                                     [_He retreats into the background._

KAN.

    You’ve touched my quick more nearly than you think--
    Well, Gyges?

GYGES.

         Sire, I have been seeking you.

KAN.

    Not more than I’ve been seeking you. Say on,
    What brings you here? You’re dumb and turn away.
    Whate’er it be I have the strength for much.

GYGES.

    Oh, had you but received my sacrifice!

KAN.

    I ne’er will rue that thus I have not done,
    But had it been received, what profit there?
    That night suspicion inextinguishable
    Took kindle in her bosom from your sigh.
    But cease this feud of conscience. Where’s the man
    That is a man and had not sighed like you?

GYGES.

    No blessed day was that on which the King
    Of Lydia first met with Grecian Gyges.

KAN.

    I curse it not.

GYGES.

                 Your own hand had the power
    To shield you from that couched and glowering tiger,
    And I by launching my unwanted dart
    Became not your deliverer from destruction
    But robber of your master-shot.

KAN.

                               ’Tis true.
    I had him fully marked and was prepared,
    But when I saw your eyes in eager glitter,
    The glow upon your cheeks, the heave of breast,
    I banished from my lips a quiet smile
    And gave you thanks.

GYGES.

                 Ever this noble mind.
    E’en when I dreamt not of it! Can I then?

KAN.

    And the first glance told me another thing,
    That should there come on me a greater peril
    You’d do the deed again and make it braver.
    And if it has not come you bear no guilt.

GYGES.

    Sire, speak no more. ’Tis even as you say,
    Against a single hair from off your head
    I would have staked my blood--yet now--yet now--
    So wills the curse, I must demand your life.

KAN.

    My life?

GYGES.

          Even so, if she is not to die.
    The sun already dips to his descent,
    And if your eye still sees the evening star
    Then hers shall never see it, nevermore.

KAN.

    Then if you kill not me she kills herself?

GYGES.

    She does. How else could I stand thus before you?

KAN.

    No other sacrifice requites her vengeance?

GYGES.

    I offered her the dearest, but in vain.

KAN.

    Ah, then she will refuse me even farewell!

GYGES.

    I fear she’ll flee your face into the grave.

KAN.

    No more, then. Take my life.--You start aback?

GYGES.

    So willing with the gift?

KAN.

                               Who does a sin
    Does penance too. Who smiles not in atonement
    Makes no atonement. Am I known so ill
    And held so light by you that such a word
    Astounds, nay more, affrights you? Where’s my heart
    That I should force her with her rosy fingers,
    Too tender even for plucking of a flower,
    To stretch them for a dagger and to prove
    If she be skilled to find her heart?

GYGES.

                                  This too?
    Flinging the very garment’s shelter back
    And offering breast yourself?

KAN.

                            I show the path
    That’s nearest to the goal, and make it smooth
    That when you stand again before her sight
    There’ll be at least one thing in me to praise.
    Here is the rushing fount of life you seek,
    You have the key yourself, then ope the lock!

GYGES.

    Not for the world!

KAN.

                        For her, my friend, for her!

                                    [GYGES _makes a gesture of refusal_.

    Nay, I bethink me now. You wished to-day
    With your own hand to spill your youthful blood.
    Maybe I too can muster will; then go
    And take to her my latest-breathed farewell.
    ’Tis even as though I now were stretched on earth.

GYGES.

    No, no! I came to fight.

KAN.

                              Oho, the pride!
    In fight with me you cannot be defeated,
    Eh, friend?

GYGES.

        You know me better.

KAN.

                             That as well!
    Should I be conqueror even there remains
    No less the other. Is not that the scent
    The aloe sheds? It is; so soon the wind
    Carries it from the garden. ’Tis unclosed
    Only when night is near. The time is come.

GYGES.

    The ring--oh, oh!

KAN.

                       You mean ’twere better left
    Unravished in its charnel? True it is.
    Rhodope’s dread presentience was no lie,
    Nor was your shudder empty monishment.
    Not for a game nor the mad pranks o’ the fool
    Its metal has been welded, and perchance
    There hangs on it the whole world-destiny.
    Methinks ’tis given me to dare the vision
    Of time’s most ancient gulfs, and see the fight
    The young gods fought with the hoar gods of eld.
    Zeus, hurled aback full oft, comes climbing on
    Toward the gold seat o’ the Father, in his hand
    The sickle of horror, and behind him creeps
    A Titan to the attack, sore-bowed with fetters.
    Why is he not perceived of Kronos? Lo
    He’s manacled and maimed and downward hurled!
    Wears he the ring? Gyges, he wore the ring
    And Gaia’s self had handed him the ring!

GYGES.

    Then curséd be the man that brought it to you.

KAN.

    And why? You did the right, and had I been
    Made of your mould it had not worked its lure,
    In silence had I given it back to night
    And all would now be as it was erewhile.
    Then seek not on the passive tool’s account
    To bargain for my sin. The guilt is mine.

GYGES.

    But ah, what guilt!

KAN.

                          How deep ’tis hers to say,
    And keen I feel I have been sore at fault.
    What strikes me strikes me only as is meet.
    The plain word of my age-ennobled servant
    Taught me a thing. One should not always ask
    “What’s this or that?” but sometimes “What’s its import?”
    I know for very truth the time is coming
    When all will think as I do. Say, what virtue
    Inheres in veils, in crowns or rusty swords
    That is eternal? But the weary world
    O’er things like these is sunken into sleep;
    Things that she wrested in her latest throe
    And holds to fast. Who’d plunder her thereof
    Wakes her. Then let that man first search himself
    If he be strong enough to hold her bound
    When, jolted half awake, she lays about her,
    And rich enough to offer her aught higher,
    If she be loath to let her trinket go.
    Herakles was the man, but I am not.
    Too proud to be his heir in lowly mind
    And far too weak to be his peer in deed,
    I’ve undermined the ground that held me firm
    And now its gnashing vengeance draws me down.

GYGES.

    Nay, nay!

KAN.

               ’Tis thus nor can be otherwise.
    The world has need of sleep as you and I
    Need ours; she grows like us and waxes strong
    When she would seem the prey of death and fools
    Are moved to mirth. Yes, when a man lies prone,
    The arms erewhile so busy hanging slack,
    The eyes imprisoned fast and closed the mouth,
    Whose lips are knitted in convulsive twitch
    Retaining still perchance a withered roseleaf
    As though ’twere greatest treasure--that would give
    A sight to raise the laugh of him who wakes
    And looks upon it. But were such a man,
    Some being born upon a stranger star
    And quite unwitting of our human wants,
    To come and cry at you--“Here’s fruit and wine,
    Arise, eat, drink!” What were you like to do?
    Why this, unless you choked him, ere you knew it,
    With a half-conscious grip and crushing hug,
    You’d answer:--“This is more than meat and drink!”
    And slumber calmly on until the morning
    That summons not the one and not the other,
    Nay, but all mortals into freshened life.
    Just such a meddling mar-peace was myself.
    Now I am caught between Briareus’ hands
    And he will grind the insect that would sting.
    Then, Gyges, howsoe’er the wave of life
    May lift you (and be sure ’twill rear your fate
    Still higher than you think) be bold of faith
    And do not tremble even before a crown;
    This only--never break the sleep o’ the world.
    And now----

GYGES.

        The sun goes down. The thing must be.

KAN.

    Thoas!

                                              [_He takes off his crown._

THOAS.

        What means this, Sire?

KAN.

                                I think you wished
    To see me fight. Be glad, then, for I do it.
    But this for payment--keep the crown in ward
    And give’t to whoso of the twain survives.
    (_To_ GYGES.) If it be you, I grudge it not, and men
    Will see it on your brow with joy--Come, come!
    You say you’d never take it? Fie, oh fie!
    ’Twould only lapse upon a lesser man.

GYGES.

    Sire, swear you’ll do your honest part in fight.

KAN.

    ’Tis mine to show her I’ll not lightly lose
    So dear a loveliness. I swear it then.
    And you?

GYGES.

     She lives and dies with me. I must.
    And though at every cut and thrust I’m thinking
    “Liefer by far a kiss!” yet none the more
    I’ll slack the force of any blow.

KAN.

                                Then give
    Your hand for this once more.--Now be for me
    A tiger. I for you a lion, and this
    The wildwood where we oft have led the chase.

                                                           [_They draw._

GYGES.

    There’s one thing yet. Shame held it back. She means
    To wed with me if you be overcome.

KAN.

    Ah, now I understand her!

GYGES.

                           On your guard!

                    [_A fight, during which they disappear to the left._

THOAS.

    He falls! The last o’ the Heraclids is fallen!

                                             [_Exit in their direction._


SCENE 2

_The Temple of Hestia. Evening: torches are lit. In the centre a statue
of the goddess._ RHODOPE _appears from the right in solemn procession,
with her_ LESBIA, HERO, _and_ KARNA.

RHODOPE.

    Karna, the funeral-pyre--’tis being built?

KARNA.

    ’Tis built ere now.

                              [RHODOPE _paces into the temple and kneels
                              before the statue of the goddess_.

HERO.

                         She speaks of funeral-pyres
    Instead of bridal-chambers?

LESBIA.

                        What, amazed?
    There must be first one dead within this place
    Or ever in this place there be a bride.

HERO.

    I tremble, Lesbia. She questioned me,
    When I was tiring her, if in our garden
    Were growing poison-berries----

LESBIA.

                            What?

HERO.

                                   And if
    I might not go and bring her some of them,
    For every one she said she’d give a pearl
    Though there should be a hundred; but with speed
    It must be done.

LESBIA.

                    And you?

HERO.

                            I answered no,
    And thereupon she smiled and said, “I’m like
    To think it. I shall show you them to-morrow.”
    And yet I thought it strange.

LESBIA.

                                And strange it is.

HERO.

    Thereon she sent me from her, but I spied
    And saw her take a poniard fine of point
    As though for test, no other word could name it,
    And scratch her arm.

LESBIA.

                 Hero!

HERO.

                        ’Tis true. There came
    Red blood as well.

LESBIA.

              Oh horror!

HERO.

                          Sooth it is
    She honours equally with ours strange gods
    We have no knowledge of; and so perchance
    ’Tis some dark rite.

LESBIA.

                 No, no! Where sounds the flute
    And where the pipe? Who sings the song of Hymen?
    Where is the band of dancers? I was blind!
    She has gone forth to turn her home no more.
    Queen, hearken to my prayer--relent!... And is
    A feast prepared?

HERO.

                No. Oh, to be in the dark!

LESBIA.

    Then curses on the pride of heart that held me,
    This very day of all, so far from her!
    And now--O Goddess, she is Thine this hour,
    Incline her heart, I cannot do so more!

HERO.

    Yes, Pure and Chaste and Holy, do this thing ...
    And is’t not strange as well that she should choose
    No more the ever-blithesome Aphrodite
    For witness, but the stern-faced Hestia
    Before whose gaze the greenest garland dries?

LESBIA.

    Oh, oh, it means the Thing most dread of all!

                                                         [_Enter_ GYGES.

HERO.

    Gyges!

LESBIA.

        Oh take him! Only--do it not!

GYGES.

    I feel as though myself had lost the blood
    That streamed from out his veins. I am death-cold.

HERO.

    How pale his seeming is!

GYGES.

                           There is the altar--
    But at another have I sought for her----
    And there her maids are standing--there is she----
    What means it all?

                                                         [_Enter_ THOAS.

THOAS.

                I offer you the crown.

GYGES.

    It passes to the Lydians, not to me.

THOAS.

    I brought it to the Lydians ere to you,
    And as their herald stand before you now.

THE PEOPLE (_without_).

    Hail, Gyges, Hail!

                                       [RHODOPE _rises and turns round_.

THE PEOPLE (_pressing in_).

    Gyges, our King, all hail!

THOAS.

    This shouting is no thing for pride. The neighbours
    Have fallen on the land, and ’tis your task
    To lead them.

GYGES.

          What?

THOAS.

                ’Twas just as I had thought.
    He was too mild; there’s not a soul that feared him,
    And now they’re here.

                                             [GYGES _puts on the crown_.

GYGES.

                  ’Tis I that pay his debt.

RHOD. (_who has been slowly approaching_ GYGES).

    Gyges, your own is first to pay.

GYGES.

                         O Queen,
    Be you the prize that draws me with its lure
    When far and wide I’ve crushed my foes in rout.

RHOD.

    Nay, nay! You gain no hour of grace from me.
    We cannot go before my Father’s presence;
    Then come with me and stand at Hestia’s altar,
    And give to me before her countenance
    The hand’s eternal bond I give to you.

GYGES.

    Had you but seen how he took leave of life
    You’d call’t a holy thing, this awed recoil
    That sanctions not the mere touch of your garment,
    Till I have done this thing for him. There’s none
    Had more o’ the rich world’s goods than he, and yet
    He went therefrom as others come therein.

RHOD.

    If with such noble soul he trod the way
    To dusky death, that realm where none renews
    The stain of sin, then with a glow at heart
    I’ll meet him, though no more than on the threshold.
    Yea, I will stoop and make my hands a cup
    To draw for him from Lethe; but myself
    Shall never taste the beatific drink.
    But you--I warn you--make an end!

GYGES.

                               So be it.
    Yet this I swear to thee, beloved Shade,
    I shall away as soon as e’er ’tis done.

RHOD.

    I too have sworn to do a thing.

GYGES.

                                  O Queen,
    The man whose hand defers a cup so brimming
    With every bliss, as mine does now, though but
    For one short hour, that man has won it well.

RHOD.

    Hush, hush! Your feet are in a holy place!

                                              [_They walk to the altar._

    O Hestia, Thou Guardian of the Flame
    Whose fire consumes the thing it cannot cleanse,
    I give this youth my thanks that once again
    I dare appear before thy countenance.
    And as the folk exalteth him to King,
    Be witness thou, I raise him to my lord.

                                          [_She gives_ GYGES _her hand_.

    And you--regard as wedding-gift the crown
    Now flinging from your head its lordly sparkle,
    But give to me the Dead Man’s Ring for pledge.

GYGES.

    Nay, that the King still bears upon his finger.

RHOD.

    Already then it has its fitting place.

                                             [_She frees_ GYGES’ _hand_.

    And now step back. Be faithful to your vow
    As I keep faith with mine. My stain is purged,
    For none has seen me save for whom ’twas meet.
    But now I disunite me (_stabs herself_) thus from you!




                          HEROD AND MARIAMNE

                        A TRAGEDY IN FIVE ACTS

                             TRANSLATED BY

                              L. H. ALLEN


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ


    KING HEROD.

    MARIAMNE, _his Queen_.

    ALEXANDRA, _her Mother_.

    SALOME, _Sister of the King_.

    SOEMUS, _Governor of Galilee_.

    JOSEPH, _Viceregent in the absence of_ HEROD.

    SAMEAS, _a Pharisee_.

    TITUS, _a Roman Captain_.

    JOAB, _a Courier_.

    JUDAS, _a Jewish Captain_.

    ARTAXERXES }
    MOSES      } _Servants; also other Servants_.
    JEHU       }

    SILO, _a Citizen_.

    ZERUBABEL               } _Galileans_.
    PHILO, _his Son_        }

    A ROMAN COURIER.

    AARON and five other JUDGES.

    THREE KINGS FROM THE EAST, _afterwards given the added title of
    “holy” by the Christian Church_.

PLACE: Jerusalem. TIME: The Birth of Christ.




HEROD AND MARIAMNE




ACT I


SCENE 1

_A Castle on Zion. A large Audience-Chamber._ JOAB, SAMEAS, ZERUBABEL
_and his Son_ PHILO, TITUS, JUDAS, _and many others_. _Enter_ HEROD.

JOAB (_advancing towards the King_).

    I’m back again.

HEROD.

                      I’ll speak with you anon.
    Announce the weightiest first!

JOAB (_retreating: aside_).

                                  The weightiest!
    I had a kind of notion ’twere to learn
    Whether my head sits shoulder-tight or not.

HEROD (_beckoning to_ JUDAS).

    How is it with the fire?

JUDAS.

                             With the fire?
    Know you already what I came to tell?

HEROD.

    At midnight it broke out; I was the first
    To mark it, and the first to call the watch.
    Am I at fault, or did I wake yourself?

JUDAS.

    It is extinguished. (_Aside._) Ha, then it is true
    The mummer dogs the town-ways in disguise
    When others are asleep! Then bridle tongue!
    A chance may prick it blind against his ear!

HEROD.

    I saw when all was in a reel of flames
    A woman, young, through the window of a house;
    She seemed quite sense-numbed. Was this woman saved?

JUDAS.

    She’d none of it.

HEROD.

                      She’d none of it?

JUDAS.

                                       By Heaven,
    She made defence against the force essayed
    To bear her off; she laid about with hands
    And feet; she clutched and clung to the bed
    On which she sat, shrieking “that very hour
    She’d chosen for a death by her own hands.
    And now that death was come by lucky chance!”

HEROD.

    She must have been a maniac.

JUDAS.

                                Possibly
    The poignancy of pain gave her the wrench.
    Her husband had just died the moment ere then.
    His corpse, still warm, was lying in his bed.

HEROD (_aside_).

    That tale’s in point: I’ll tell’t to Mariamne
    And fix her eyes i’ the very telling! (_Aloud._) This woman
    Has had no child belike; in the other case
    The child shall be my care; as for herself,
    Let her have rich and princely burial.
    I feel she was among all women queen.

SAMEAS (_advancing towards_ HEROD).

    A burial? I protest the thing can’t be,
    Or, at the least, not in Jerusalem,
    For it is written----

HEROD.

                  Are you not known to me?

SAMEAS.

    You’ve had ere now a chance to make acquaintance;
    I was the tongue once of the Sanhedrim
    When it was dumb before you.

HEROD.

                         Sameas,
    I hope you know me too. Hard on the heel
    You have pursued the youngling, and were lief
    To make the hangman richer by the head
    Of that same youngling. I forgive your deeds
    As man and King. Your neck still carries yours.

SAMEAS.

    If for the grace that bade you leave it me
    I dare not use it, here it is! That were
    A worse mischance than loss for good and all.

HEROD.

    Why did you come? I never saw you here
    Till now within these walls.

SAMEAS.

                        That’s just the reason
    You see me here to-day. You may have thought
    It was through fear of you. I fear you not!
    Not even now, when many learnt to fear you
    Who till this time--I mean up till the death
    Of Aristobulus--had no fear of you;
    And now at offered opportunity
    To give you proof I have a grateful heart,
    I grasp the chance, and warn you solemnly
    Against a deed that the Lord God abhors.
    This woman’s bones unhallowed are accursed,
    She has rejected rescue heathen-wise;
    No less the act than had she killed herself.
    And then----

HEROD.

         Some other time!
              (_To_ ZERUBABEL.) From Galilee!
    Zerubabel as well who once----Be welcome!
    Yourself’s to blame I’ve seen you not till now.

ZER.

    ’Tis a high honour, King, you know me still.
    (_Pointing to his mouth._) But then of course these teeth,
           these mighty twins
    That make me a blood-cousin to the boar----

HEROD.

    The look of my own face will I forget
    Sooner than his who’s served me trustily.
    When I was brigand-hunting in your land,
    My sharpest sleuth-hound you! Why come you now?

ZER. (_pointing to his son_).

    Small cause enough. This Philo here’s my son.
    Soldiers you need, and I--well none need I.
    This one’s a Roman. By some oversight
    A Hebrew daughter gave him to the world.[2]

HEROD.

    From Galilee comes to me naught but good.
    I’ll have you summoned later.

                                      [ZERUBABEL _retires with his son_.

TITUS (_advancing_).

                                 A cheat’s fraud
    I have discovered forces----

HEROD.

                         Out with it!

TITUS.

    The dumb speak!

HEROD.

                     Riddle not!

TITUS.

                                   Your halberdier
    Who, companied with one of my centurions,
    Last night was standing guard at your bed-chamber----

HEROD (_aside_).

    The man whom Alexandra, my wife’s mother,
    Enlisted in my service----

TITUS.

                        He’s not dumb,
    Though not a soul but seems to think so of him.
    In dreaming he has found his voice and cursed.

HEROD.

    In dreaming!

TITUS.

                 Yes, he fell asleep on guard,
    And my centurion had no mind to wake him,
    Thinking his duty’s scope made no exaction,
    Because he is not drafted with his cohort.
    But his sharp eye was on him, if he fell
    To catch him that your rest be not disturbed,
    Since it was early and you lay asleep.
    While he does this the dumb one sudden starts
    A-murmuring, and calls aloud your name,
    And couples it with a most fearsome curse.

HEROD.

    And this centurion suffers no delusion?

TITUS.

    If so, he must himself have fallen asleep,
    An omen, for the eternal city’s future,
    Worse than the bolt of thunder which of late
    Blasted the She-wolf on the Capitol.

HEROD.

    My thanks to you--and now----

                                           [_Dismisses all except_ JOAB.

                                    Ay, so it stands!
    Traitors in my own house, open defiance
    From Pharisaic scum, the more unblushing
    Since I dare not deal chastisement unless
    I’m mad enough to turn fools into martyrs;
    And from those Galileans some scant love,
    No, a self-interested hanging-on,
    Since I’m the Bogy of the Shining Sword
    That from the distance scares their rabble-dregs.
    And--this man brings me certain news of ill;
    He was too hasty-eager to announce it.
    For even he, though my own body-slave,
    Delights in my chagrin if he but knows
    I must don mask as though I saw it not.
    (_To_ JOAB.) The news from Alexandria!

JOAB.

                                    I had speech
    With Antony.

HEROD.

         O prologue marvellous!
    Had speech with Antony! I’m used to see
    My couriers to his audience vouchsafed.
    You are the first who finds himself compelled
    To reassure me he was privileged thus.

JOAB.

    A privilege hardly won! I was repulsed,
    Obdurately repulsed!

HEROD (_aside_).

                       A sign he stands
    Still better with Octavian than I thought!
    (_Aloud._) That shows you picked the right hour clumsily.

JOAB.

    I picked each single one o’ the twenty-four
    That make the total day. Whate’er was doing
    I budged not from the spot, never a foot,
    Even when the soldiers offered me some morsel,
    And, when I spurned their bounty, vented japes:--
    “He’ll only eat the leavings of the cat
    And what the dogs have tattered with their jaws!”
    At last I had success----

HEROD.

                       Some cleverer man
    Had won forthwith----

JOAB.

                   In gaining audience.
    It was now night, and the first notion forced
    Upon my mind was that I had been summoned
    To lengthen out his gibing soldiers’ jest.
    For, as I entered, there before my eyes
    A ring of cushion-sprawling drinkers lay;
    But he with his own hand filled me with a goblet
    And called out to me--“Drain this to my health!”
    I courteously declined, whereat he said:--
    “If killing yonder fellow were my mood
    I’d merely need for but an eight-days’ space
    To have him at my board, and pile thereon
    The tribute paid me by the earth and ocean.
    He’d sit an-idling, peak away from famine,
    And swear in dying he’d a bellyful!”

HEROD.

    Yes, yes, they know our breed! It must be altered.
    What Moses merely bade, to shield this folk
    From a backsliding to its old calf-cult,
    Though _he_ was not a fool, such law this folk
    Holds fatuous as a self-sufficient end;
    So sick men cured still use the healing drug
    As though their food and physic were the same.
    This must----Continue!

JOAB.

                    I was soon assured
    I had mistook my man, for he dismissed
    All State-affairs while cups were going round,
    Appointed magistrates and duly ordered
    The sacrifice to Zeus, consulted augurs,
    Spoke with the couriers fast as e’er they came,
    Not me alone. Oh, a rare sight he made!
    A slave behind him with his ear acock,
    A tablet and a stylus in his hand,
    Was scribbling down--absurdly solemn owl!
    Whatever crank escaped his tippler-mood.
    And on the morning after, so I learnt,
    He reads the contents through, his head aburst
    With drunkard-dregs, and holds his words so true
    That--hear the latest oath they say he swore--
    With his own fist he’d choke his very windpipe
    Had he the night before in fuddled fit
    Made a fool’s freakish present of the world
    He dubs his own, and thereby forfeited
    His right to one sole single place thereon.
    Whether, then too his walk’s a zigzag waddle,
    As when at night he seeks his bed, I know not;
    But to my thinking, both are on all fours.

HEROD.

    Thou’rt conqueror, Octavian! Soon or late;
    That’s all the question. Well?

JOAB.

                            When at long last
    The turn had come to me and I delivered
    The letter for him that I bore with me,
    He then and there, instead of opening it,
    Tossed it contemptuous to his secretary,
    Bade his cup-bearer bring a certain picture
    Which I should thoroughly scan, and say to him
    Whether I found the likeness good or no.

HEROD.

    It was the likeness of----

JOAB (_with sinister malice_).

                                Aristobulus,
    The High-Priest drowned a trifle suddenly.
    A long time since your royal Consort’s mother,
    Queen Alexandra, who’s had doings with him,
    Had sent it; but ’twas swallowed ravenously
    As though he’d ne’er set eyes on it before.
    Stock-still I stood, mutely confused. He spoke
    When he saw this--“The lamps here burn too dim!”
    Then, stretching out his hand toward your letter,
    Plunged it in flame and let it flicker slow
    Before the picture like an uninked sheet.

HEROD.

    Bold, e’en for him: but ’twas a wine-caprice.

JOAB.

    I cried--“What’s that you’re doing? Why, you’ve not
    So much as read the letter!” He replied:--
    “My will’s to speak with Herod! That’s the meaning!
    He is arraigned by me on capital charge!”
    Then I was bade relate how the High Priest
    Came by his death, and as I told the tale--
    A dizziness had gripped him in his bath--
    He cut me short and quick--“Gripped! Ay, that is
    The fitting word. That dizziness had fists!”
    Then I perceived--pardon if I declare it,--
    Rome’s not persuaded that the youth is drowned;
    Nay, but there’s accusation in the wind
    That by your chamberlain’s kind offices
    You’ve had him strangled in the river-depths.

HEROD.

    Thanks, Alexandra, thanks!

JOAB.

                               Then, waving hand,
    He bade me thence--I went. But, once again,
    He called to me and spoke--“You’ve not yet paid
    The question I first put you its due answer;
    Then hear it twice. This picture, does it favour
    The Dead?” As I assented with forced nod,
    “And favours Mariamne then her brother?
    Say, favours she the youth so piteous--dead?
    Is she so fair that every woman hates her?”

HEROD.

    And you?

JOAB.

              Hear first what all the others said
    Who meanwhile rose, and, gathered at my side,
    Circled the picture. With a laugh they said,
    Changing with Antony the double glance,
    “Say yes! If e’er you took the dead man’s largess,
    Hap or mishap, you’ll see his death avenged.”
    But I replied I knew no jot of it,
    For never else but draped in veils had I
    Beheld the Queen: and that’s the very truth.

HEROD (_aside_).

    Ha, Mariamne! But--I laugh at that,
    I’ll know the trick to shield me from that danger,
    This way or that, whatever way it come.
    (_To_ JOAB.) And what commission did you take for me?

JOAB.

    No smallest. If commission I had taken
    I’d not have roundabouted thus. As ’tis
    It seemed imperative.

HEROD.

                  Good: you return
    At once to Alexandria with me.
    You leave the palace under penalty.

JOAB.

    Your servant! I’ll hold talk with none i’ the palace.

HEROD.

    That’s credible! Who hankers for the cross
    Now of all times when figs begin to ripe?
    My Mute must have the axe, and should he question
    The why, he’s answered--“Just that you can question.”
    (_Aside._) So now I see through whom the Ancient Serpent
    So often learned what I--A wicked wench!
    (_To_ JOAB.) See to’t! When done I must behold the head.
    I’ll send a present to my mother-in-law.
    (_Aside._) She needs a little warning-sign, it seems.

JOAB.

    At once!

HEROD.

            This too: the Galilean lad--
    Take him beneath your wing--Zerubabel’s son.
    I’ll have a word with him too ere we go.[3]

                                                           [_Exit_ JOAB.


SCENE 2

HEROD _alone_.

HEROD.

    Now to’t, “and once again!” I’d almost said,
    But there’s no end in prospect. I resemble
    The Man i’ the Fable whom before, the lion,
    Behind, the tiger gripped at; whom the eagles
    With beak and claw were threatening imminent,
    And who was standing on a snaky clump.
    All’s one! I’ll make defence as best I can,
    And fit each enemy with his own weapon.
    Be this henceforth my law and ordinance.
    What length it takes, it shall not fret my peace.
    If but to the end I keep firm-planted feet
    And nothing lose of what I’ve called my own,
    Then let that end be on me when it will.


SCENE 3

HEROD. MARIAMNE.

                                                     [_Enter a_ SERVANT.

SERVANT.

    The Queen!

                                       [MARIAMNE _follows close on him_.

HEROD.

                You’ve just outstripped my own desire!
    I wanted----

MAR.

            Nay then, surely not to fetch
    My thanks in person for the pearls so wondrous?
    I waved you twice aside, but once again
    Make trial if I’d pleased to change my mood,
    That would have strained the patience of a man,
    And, past all doubt, the patience of a King.
    Nay, nay, I know my duty, and since you,
    After my gay-heart brother’s swift-sent death,
    Shower daily so rich gifts as though you courted
    My love anew, I come at last myself
    And show you I have gratitude in heart.

HEROD.

    I see it!

MAR.

                Faith, I cannot tell what trend
    Your bearing takes. You send for me the diver
    Deep, deep into the lightless sea, and if
    No one’s to find who for the gleaming guerdon
    Will dare disturb Leviathan’s repose,
    You fling your dungeons open and give back
    Some robber-varlet his devoted head
    To get you a pearl-fisherman for me.

HEROD.

    That seems a maddish whim? Why, madder still,
    I’ve had a murderer cut down from the cross
    When need to snatch a child from out the brand
    Was urgent, and I’ve said to him:--“If you
    Return it to the mother, in my eyes
    That counterbalances your debt to death.”
    Ay, he was in with a plunge----

MAR.

                               And back again
    Unscathed?

HEROD.

          It was too late, or otherwise
    My word kept, he’d have been dispatched to Rome
    A-soldiering. They call for tigers there!
    My policy is “Usury with all!”
    And why not drive the trade with forfeit lives?
    You have your junctures when they offer use.

MAR. (_aside_).

    Oh that he did not have the bloody hand!
    What use are words? For whatsoe’er his deed,
    Once on his tongue, he paints it wisely done.
    And oh, revolting if he drove me, drove me
    To judge a brother-murder, like the rest,
    Compelled, inevitable, wisely done!

HEROD.

    You’re silent?

MAR.

                     Shall I speak? Well then of pearls,[4]
    You know we only spoke of pearls till now,
    Of pearls that are so chaste and blanched as foam
    That even against a bloody hand they lose
    No clearness in their sparkle! And you heap
    Them high on me!

HEROD.

                   To vexing you?

MAR.

                                    Not me!
    ’Tis sure your gift can never veil intent
    Some debt to cancel, and methinks I have
    As queen and woman uncontested right
    To pearls and precious jewels: I can speak
    About the noble stone like Cleopatra:--
    “It is my slave to whom I grant my pardon
    For standing such ill vicar to the star,
    Since, for amends, it overblooms the flower.”
    And yet you have Salome for a sister.

HEROD.

    And she?

MAR.

               Come! If you’d have her murder me
    On with your work, and make the deep your plunder,
    Else--give the diver his meet rest. I stand
    Deep enough in her debt by now. You eye
    Me doubtful-scrutinous? Pah! When last year
    I lay nigh-dead, she touched me with her kiss;
    It was her very first and very last.
    I thought at once--“This is your dear reward
    For getting gone from the world!” and, faith, it was.
    Ah, but I tricked her loving hope, and rallied.
    And now I have her kiss for naught, and that
    She can’t forget. I’ve mortal fear she might
    Store it in mind were I to visit her
    With wonder-pearls upon my neck that show
    Your latest token of your deepest love.

HEROD (_aside_).

    There’s nothing lacking but that my left hand
    Turn traitor to my right!

MAR.

                        I would at least
    Disdainfully reject the greeting-cup.
    And should she proffer ’stead of spicy wine
    E’en innocent water in the crystal bowl,
    I’d let that water lie without a touch.
    True, that were bare of meaning. No, ’twould be
    A natural thing enough; for water is
    No more to me what once I felt it was,
    Mild element that gives the flowers to drink,
    Mother of life to all the world and me.
    It thrills with shudders, brims me o’er with horror
    Since its jaws oped to gulf my brother down.
    Ever I think--“there’s life dwells in the drop,
    But in the billow dwells the bitter death!”
    To you it must be quite another.

HEROD.

                             Why?

MAR.

    Since through a stream you suffer calumny.
    Its own, its dastard, its malicious deed
    It dares unload on you! But fear it not,
    I’ll give’t the lie!

HEROD.

                 In very truth?

MAR.

                                 I can!
    To love the sister and the brother murder!
    What reason yokes that pair?

HEROD.

                         Yet if, perhaps,
    Himself this brother points his thoughts at murder,
    And if alone by breasting his advance,
    Nay, by outstripping, one could save his skin!
    (We speak here of the possible) and further,
    If, harmless in himself, he make a weapon
    In hands of foeman malleable, a weapon
    Whose bite must bring sure death unless its mark
    Shatter it well before it can be hurled
    (We speak here of the possible), and last
    If this same weapon threatened no sole head,
    Nay, but a whole Folk’s grand collective head
    And one for such a Folk imperative
    As is for any other trunk its head
    (We speak here of the possible), and yet
    In such a chain of chance I think the Sister,
    As wife from love she duly owes her husband,
    As daughter of her folk from holy bond,
    As Queen, from both, would have no choice but say:--
    “What happened was the thing I dare not blame.”

                                         [_He clasps_ MARIAMNE’S _hand_.

    And if a Ruth be slow to catch my drift
    (How could she learn it at the gleaning hour?)
    The Maccabean daughter understands!
    In Jericho you could not give your kisses,
    You will be able in Jerusalem!

                                                       [_He kisses her_.

    And if perchance the kiss bring after-grudging
    Then hear a reconcilement for us twain:--
    I took it for a token of farewell
    And that farewell may be farewell eternal!

MAR.

    Eternal!

HEROD.

                   Yes! Antony’s had me summoned
    But still I know not whether I return.

MAR.

    You know not?

HEROD.

                         Since I know not how severe
    An accusation my--your mother’s lodged.

                                             [MARIAMNE _makes to speak_.

    That’s naught. I’ll bear it. But one thing alone
    I must learn from your lips. I say I must learn--
    Whether and how I undertake defence.

MAR.

    Whether----

HEROD.

                       O Mariamne, question not!
    You know the spell that knits me into you,
    You know that every day makes it more potent.
    Ah, but your heart must feel I have no strength
    To battle my own cause if you refuse
    Assurance that your heart-beats twin my own.
    Oh tell me, is that heart fiery or cold?
    And then I can tell you if Antony
    Will call me brother or condemn me straight
    To hunger-death in the earth-embowelled dungeon
    Whose blackness prisoned up Jugurtha’s death.
    You’re dumb? Oh be not dumb! How keen I feel
    That such confession scarce beseems a king;
    ’Tis not his part to yoke his neck beneath
    The common lot of man, ’tis not his part
    To bind his inmost on another’s life,
    He should be knit unto his God alone.
    I am not fashioned thus; when you last year
    Were sick to death, then I was busy too
    About self-slaughter that I might not live
    To see your death; and now that you know this
    Know yet another thing. If I should chance,
    Yes I, to be a-dying, I could do
    What you dread at Salome’s hands, I could
    A poison mix and give it you in wine,
    That even in death I might be sure of you.

MAR.

    And were you to do that you would recover!

HEROD.

    No, no! I would have shared the half with you!
    Now speak your heart. Were pardon in your grace
    For such o’erbrimming measure of love as this?

MAR.

    If after quaffing such a drink I had
    Surviving breath to utter one last word,
    I’d call a curse on you with that last word.
    (_Aside._) Yea, all the sooner were it done the surer
    That I myself, if death should call you hence,
    Could in my pain stretch hands to grasp my dagger.
    That deed the heart can do, but suffer never!

HEROD.

    In yester-evening’s fire there was a woman
    Consumed with her dead husband: ’gainst essay
    At rescue made she brindled up: this woman
    Of course meets your contempt?

MAR.

                             Who tells you that?
    She scorned at least to be an altar victim
    And sacrificed herself, a deed that proves
    She prized her dead love more than all the world.

HEROD.

    And you, and I?

MAR.

                               If you dare tell yourself
    You’ve put me in the scales against the world,
    What could be left to keep me in the world?

HEROD.

    The world! The world has many a sovereign still,
    And none among them but were fain to share
    His throne with you, not one who for your sake
    Would not abandon bride and oust his wife
    The very morn after his wedding-night.

MAR.

    Is Cleopatra dead that you speak thus?

HEROD.

    You are so fair that all who gaze upon you
    Nigh win a faith in immortality,
    That unctuous, flattering Pharisaic hope,
    Since none can realise your image e’er
    Should fade in him; so fair, that it would seem
    No wonder to me if with sudden travail
    The mountains yielded me some nobler metal
    Than gold and silver for your ornamenting,
    Some metal long enwombed against your coming;
    So fair that--ha! the knowledge that you die
    Hard on another’s death, from loving die
    That close upon his fore-flight you may hasten
    And in a sphere to hold you where one is
    And is no more (I picture such a heaven
    As latest breath with latest breath immingled),
    Ah, that were worth the self-dealt death, ’twould be
    Beyond the grave, that home where horror dwells,
    To find still one more rapture. Mariamne,
    Dare I hope such a thing, or must fear take me
    That you would--Antony has asked of you!

MAR.

    Men do not issue notes of hand for acts,
    Much less for smartings and for sacrifice,
    Such as Despair can bring, I feel full well,
    Though love can never make demand on them.[5]

HEROD.

    Farewell!

MAR.

                         Farewell! I know you will come back.
    Your slayer’s--He alone (_pointing to heaven_)----

HEROD.

                     So small the fear?

MAR.

    So great the confidence!

HEROD.

                                   Love is a-tremble,
    A-tremble even in a hero’s breast.

MAR.

    But my love trembles not!

HEROD.

                                     You tremble not?

MAR.

    Now I begin. Can you no more trust self
    Since you--the brother of me--then woe to me
    And woe to you!

HEROD.

             You hold that word in check,
    That simple word, when I had hoped of you
    An oath! What base is left whereon to build?

MAR.

    And if I gave that oath, what surety yours
    I’d keep it? Always I and only I,
    My Being as you know it. Thus I think
    Since you must end, it seems, with hope and faith
    You make beginning where you end--with both!
    Go, go! I can no other! Not now, not yet!

                                                                [_Exit._


SCENE 4

HEROD _alone_.

HEROD.

    Not now! The next day then, the next day’s morrow!
    After my death she will be kind to me!
    What, speaks a woman thus? I know that oft
    When I have called her fair she’s marred her features
    With twistings till she was no longer fair.
    I know she cannot weep, that her drawn face
    Tells what in others finds the vent of tears.
    I know that she had quarrelled with her brother
    Not long before he found death in his bath,
    And then play-acted the disconsolate,
    And, to cap that, when he was now a corpse,
    Displayed another gift received from him
    And bought for her while he went to his bath!
    Yet speaks a woman thus in the very moment
    When he, the man she loves or at the least
    Is bound to love--She turned not round again
    As once when I--She left no kerchief back
    That she for pretext--No, she can endure it
    That I with this impression--Good! So be it!
    To Alexandria--the grave--all’s one!
    But one thing first! One! Earth and Heaven hear it!
    You swore me naught, I’ll swear a thing to you!
    I’ll put you under sword! And Antony,
    Should he command my fall on your account,
    E’en though he wrought it not to save your mother
    Shall be my dupe. How doubtful e’er it be
    Whether the robe that shrouds me at my death
    Follows me to my grave because some thief
    Can still purloin it, you shall follow me!
    That’s firm and fixed! Should I return no more
    You die! A stumpy point that trips the foot!
    What gives assurance I shall be obeyed
    When I’m no longer dreaded? Ha, I think
    There’s one to find who at her frown has cause
    For shivering!


SCENE 5

HEROD. JOSEPH.

                                                     [_Enter a_ SERVANT.

SERVANT.

           Your kinsman!

HEROD.

                           He is welcome!
    There is my man! To him I hand my sword
    And goad him through the craven mood so deep
    To hardy mettle that he’ll use’t like me.

                                                        [_Enter_ JOSEPH.

JOSEPH.

    I heard immediate start for Alexandria
    Is your intent, and wished to bid God-speed.

HEROD.

    God-speed! A speed, belike, without returning.

JOSEPH.

    Without returning!

HEROD.

                       Ay, ’tis possible.

JOSEPH.

    I never saw you thus till now.

HEROD.

                                   Proof certain
    I never was in such ill plight till now.

JOSEPH.

    But if you grow heart-faint----

HEROD.

                                     I’ll not, I say!
    For, come what will, I’ll bear it: yet the hope
    That any good can come leaves me in lurch.

JOSEPH.

    That makes me wish to God I had been blind
    And ne’er on Alexandra’s hooded doings
    Had played the pry.

HEROD.

                 I could believe it of you!

JOSEPH.

    For had I not unearthed the portraiture
    Of Aristobulus which in secrecy
    For Antony was painted, and had I
    Not scented out her courier-despatch
    To Cleopatra: more than all, the coffin
    That with her son concealed her at the harbour--
    Had I not blocked it and prevented flight
    That was begun already----

HEROD.

                       Then had she
    No thanks to owe you, and with qualmless mind
    You’d bear to see her daughter on the throne,
    The throne that she, the dauntless Maccabean,
    Will surely mount if I return no more,
    And none before her edge his way thereto.

JOSEPH.

    I mean it not that way; I mean that much
    Had lain in smother.

HEROD.

                  Much! Why, not a doubt
    But much that’s awkward had instead occurred.
    No matter now. You make your tally full;
    But there’s one item you’ve forgot----

JOSEPH.

                                   And that?

HEROD.

    You were presumably attending him
    The time he went a-bathing when----

JOSEPH.

                               I was.

HEROD.

    Presumably you wrestled him?

JOSEPH.

                               At first, yes.

HEROD.

    H’m, queerish! Well?

JOSEPH.

                       No dizziness attacked him
    When he was in my arms, and had it happened
    Either I would have rescued him or he
    Had dragged me under with him to the bottom.

HEROD.

    No doubt. But as you cannot help but know,
    All who were there make just your protestation,
    And since a perverse chance will have it so,
    That you not only bore him company
    But wrestled him----

JOSEPH.

                 What means that check of word?

HEROD.

    My Joseph, you and I, we make a couple
    That stands stern charge.

JOSEPH.

                     I too?

HEROD.

                             I dare assert
    I have both kin and trusty friend in you?

JOSEPH.

    ’Tis so I flatter me.

HEROD.

                         ’Twere better not so.
    Had I like Saul cast the dart after you
    And could you prove it through your deathly wound
    For you ’twere better: no back-biter’s word
    Had risen to find the credulous ear: and you,
    For a blood-deed of which your hands were guiltless,
    Would never lose your head.

JOSEPH.

                                I? lose my head?

HEROD.

    That is your fate if I do not return,
    And Mariamne----

JOSEPH.

                   But my hands _are_ guiltless:

HEROD.

    What helps you there? the ugly look’s against you.
    And then again, suppose you were believed,
    Are not the many, many services
    You’ve rendered me, in Alexandra’s eyes
    As many crimes against herself? Will she
    Not have these thoughts--“Had he o’erwinked my flight
    There’d be one living who now lies i’ the grave?”

JOSEPH.

    True, true!

HEROD.

                 And can she not then with some show
    Of right demand your life to pay another’s
    That she imagines lost through fault of yours?
    Will she not set her daughter on to do it?

JOSEPH.

    Salome! Ah, that comes of visiting
    The painter. Year on year fresh portraits of me
    She still demands.

HEROD.

                      I know she loves you dear.

JOSEPH.

    The less her love, the better were my case.
    Had I the portrait of Aristobulus
    Detected when I--good then. She can soon
    Possess my latest, less a head.

HEROD.

                                   My Joseph,
    A man protects his head.

JOSEPH.

                            When you have given
    Your own for lost?

HEROD.

               That’s only half the trick.
    I’ll try to save it through the stratagem,
    That of myself free-willed I thrust that head
    Into the lion’s gullet.

JOSEPH.

                          Once luck helped you
    When the Pharisees----

HEROD.

                         This is a sorrier case.
    But hap what haps to me it is my will
    To lay your destiny in your own hands.
    You always were a man, be now a king.
    I hang the purple mantle round your neck
    And proffer you the sceptre and the sword.
    Hold fast. To me alone you give it back!

JOSEPH.

    What, do I understand you?

HEROD.

                               And confirm
    Your throne and life with it in certain tenure
    By killing Mariamne if your hear
    That I return not hither.

JOSEPH.

                             Mariamne?

HEROD.

    She is the last bond whereby Alexandra
    Is knit unto the folk now that the flood
    Has choked her son; she is the gay-hued plume
    Rebellion’s helm will flaunt, the day whereon
    It heads against you.

JOSEPH.

                         Ah, but Mariamne!

HEROD.

    Amazed that I----? I’ll make no false front, Joseph!
    My counsel’s good, is good for you; what need
    Of further words? yet, to be frank, I give it
    Not for your sake alone--Here’s the bluff truth!
    That she should with some other--I can’t bear it--
    That would be bitterer than--I grant she’s proud--
    But after death--and then, Antony--
    And first and worst of all that mother of hers
    Who’ll harry on the dead against the dead--
    You catch my drift, you must.

JOSEPH.

                                 But----

HEROD.

                                 Hear me out!
    She led me on to hope that she herself
    Would deal her death if I----Tell me, can debts
    Be summoned in by proxy? ’Tis allowed
    Even by force--what think you?

JOSEPH.

                                  ’Tis allowed.

HEROD.

    Promise me then that you will take her life
    If she take not her own. Be not too hasty
    And not too tardy either. Go to her
    Soon as my messenger, for I shall send one,
    Reports of me “it’s over!” tell it her
    And mark then if she reaches hand for dirk
    Or makes to do aught else. You promise?

JOSEPH.

                                           Yes.

HEROD.

    I will not have you swear, for no man yet
    Forced any one to swear he’d use his foot
    To crush a snake that threatened him with death.
    He does it of himself if he be sane;
    For he could sooner practise abstinence
    Of meat and drink without a scathe, than this.

                                              [JOSEPH _makes a gesture_.

    I know you throughly and I will commend you
    To Antony as one in all this crew
    That he dare trust in. You will prove him that
    By showing that a woman of your blood
    Is not too sacred to become your victim
    When smothering of rebellion is the stake,
    For that’s the point of view will gloze the deed,
    That side you serve up for his eyes. ’Tis followed
    By a street hubbub: your despatch to him
    Is that an outbreak was your deed’s precursor
    And only by its instrument was quelled.
    As for the folk, ’twill have a shuddering-fit
    When it beholds your bloody sword, and many
    Will say:--“It seems I knew but half this man!”
    And now----

JOSEPH.

                I’ll see you yet, not now alone;
    I know for sure, as ever you’ll come back.

HEROD.

    ’Tis not past hope: and therefore one thing more--

                                                        [_A long pause._

    I swore just now an oath that touches you.

                                        [_Writes a letter and seals it._

    Here ’tis! Receive in charge this letter sealed.
    You see the run o’ the title--

JOSEPH.

                                   To the headsman!

HEROD.

    I’ll keep what I have therein promised you,
    And if, perhaps, you’ve mind to tell a tale
    About a King who----

JOSEPH.

                        Come! Impose the task,
    To hand this note myself unto the headsman.[6]

                                                                [_Exit._


SCENE 6

HEROD _alone_.

HEROD.

    Now she lives under sword, and that’s my spur
    To do what I ne’er did before, to suffer
    What ne’er before I suffered, and find comfort
    If all be vain! and now, away!

                                                                [_Exit._




ACT II


SCENE 1

_The Castle on Zion_. ALEXANDRA’S _Apartments_. ALEXANDRA. SAMEAS.

ALEXANDRA.

    You know it now.

SAMEAS.

                       It gives me no surprise.
    No, in a Herod nothing gives surprise
    Who once as stripling on the Sanhedrim
    Declared a war: who with his gleaming weapon
    Strode up before his judge and dropped the hint
    That he himself was Headsman and the Headsman
    Upon himself no sentence executes,
    He may as man--Ha, I can see him now
    As, front to front opposing the High Priest,
    He leaned against a column ’mid a ring
    Of his hired bravos, who in robber-hunting
    Turned robber too--strange metamorphosis!
    And took our total tally, head for head,
    As though he stood before a thistle patch
    And summed in mind a way to weed it clean.

ALEX.

    Yes, yes, that was an hour of hours for him,
    A moment he may proudly call to mind.
    A boyish madcap, scarce in his twentieth year,
    He stands arraigned before the Sanhedrim,
    Because in stark presumptuous sacrilege
    He’d arrogated violence on the law;
    Because his hand unsanctioned executed
    A death-decree you had not yet pronounced.
    The dead man’s widow, as he treads the threshold,
    Counters him with her curse: within there sits
    All in Jerusalem that’s old and grey.
    But since he comes not sackclothed, and no ashes
    Bestrew his head, you get a sag in the heart:
    You think no more with punishment to greet him,
    You think no more with threatenings to tame him!
    You say him naught, he laughs you off and goes.

SAMEAS.

    I spoke!

ALEX.

               Yes, when too late!

SAMEAS.

                                 And had I done it
    Before that moment it had been too soon.
    Through reverence for the High Priest I was silent.
    He was the eldest and the youngest I.

ALEX.

    No matter. Had you courage at that moment
    To prove you held the simple heart of duty
    The larger mood would not be urgent now.
    Then look to’t well if you--Ho, ho! I see
    Another loophole yet remains if you
    Scarce relish combat with him, and in truth
    ’Twere risky play. Best ’ware him. So you’ll enter
    For a mild bout with lions and with tigers
    In this brute-battle that he now ordains.

SAMEAS.

    What mean these words?

ALEX.

                             You know the fighting-games
    Of Rome? What, no?

SAMEAS.

               Thank God I know them not.
    I count it for no jot of gain to know
    About the heathen but what Moses tells us.
    Down go my eyelids every single time
    I see a Roman soldier cross my path,
    And then I bless my father in his grave
    That he ne’er gave me tutoring in their tongue.

ALEX.

    And so you do not know that savage beasts
    Are shipped by them from Africa to Rome
    In hundreds?

SAMEAS.

         No indeed, I know it not.

ALEX.

    Not know that there in a stone-built arena
    They drive them at each other, and that slaves
    Are hounded on them, who for life or death
    Must face them in the fight, and they the while
    Circled around upon high benches sit
    All jubilant when wounds of death are gaping
    And when the red blood spurts on sprinkled sand?

SAMEAS.

    Such things the wildest fancy of my dreaming
    Ne’er showed me; but it joys my very soul
    If such they do. It fits the breed o’ them!
    (_With raised hands._) Lord, Thou art great; and though
          Thy will vouchsafe
    The heathen life, he must requite the gift
    By payment to Thee of a gruesome tribute.
    Thou dost chastise him as he uses others.
    Such games I could well see!

ALEX.

                           Your wish will find
    Fruition soon as Herod comes again.
    He plans to introduce them.

SAMEAS.

                       Never, never!

ALEX.

    That’s what I said to you. Why not? We have
    Lions enough for sure. The mountain herd
    Will be rejoiced to see their tale diminished
    By saving many kine and many calves.[7]

SAMEAS.

    To raise no other point, where would he find
    The fighters? In our folk there are no slaves
    Bound to his beck and call for life or death.

ALEX.

    The first I see before me.

SAMEAS.

                             What?

ALEX.

                                     For sure!
    You will, as now, twist up your angry face,
    Forget yourself, perhaps, and clench the fists,
    Set eyes at rolling and the teeth at gnashing
    If spared to witness that high day on which,
    August, as Solomon of yore the Temple,
    He consecrates the heathenish arena.
    This will not slip his eyes, and for reward
    He passes you a signal that you enter
    And show to the assembled folk your powers
    When you stand face to face against a lion
    Who’d been whole days before made sharp with hunger.
    But since among our folk there’s lack of slaves,
    The death-devoted criminals must needs
    Supply their place; and who’s more death-devoted
    Than he who openly defies the King?

SAMEAS.

    He may----

ALEX.

                 Dispel your doubts! It would go ill
    If he should lose his head before his time.
    There would be projects nipped along with him
    That Pompey, who with brazen heathendom
    Dared the approach unto the Holy of Holies,
    Himself might----

SAMEAS (_breaking out_).

    Antony, if thou’lt but grip him;
    A whole year’s space I vow I will not curse thee!
    And if thou dost it not--then good, we’re ready!

ALEX.

    He says that if our folk were not ordained
    To mix with others, then had we this earth-ball
    From God received for our sole dwelling-portion.

SAMEAS.

    He says so?

ALEX.

                 But since Fate has other will
    There rises need the dam-walls to unbarrier
    Which long have shut us, like a stagnant mere
    Locked from the sea, away from other peoples,
    And there’s no other method but that we
    In use and custom mould us to their fashion.

SAMEAS.

    In use and--(_to Heaven_) Lord, if I break not in raving
    Send me Thy sign how such a churl shall die,
    Sign of some death which every other death
    Sucks of its horrors, and proclaim to me
    That it is Herod for whose sake ’tis done.

ALEX.

    Be you then the Death-Angel?

SAMEAS.

                               Or for him
    Or for myself! I swear’t! Can I not hinder
    This ghastly plan, my impotence I’ll punish
    With murder of myself (_with a gesture towards his breast_)
          ere that day comes,
    The day that he shall first befleck with mire.
    _There_ is a binding oath that a misdeed
    Will wring from me if for a hero-deed
    I prove unfit. Who ever swore a greater?

ALEX.

    Good! But forget not this; if your own arm
    Be over-weak to dash your foemen downwards,
    A stranger’s arm must not then be contemned.

SAMEAS.

    And such a stranger?

ALEX.

                            You may arm with ease.

SAMEAS.

    Speak plainer language!

ALEX.

                             Who created Herod
    A King?

SAMEAS.

            Why, Antony; who otherwise?

ALEX.

    And wherefore did it?

SAMEAS.

                       While it pleased him so;
    Perhaps, too, just because it pleased not us.
    When had a heathen ever better grounds?

ALEX.

    And, further, what maintains him on the throne?

SAMEAS.

    Not the folk’s blessing! Maybe ’tis its curse.
    Who can say that?

ALEX.

               I! Nothing but his trick
    Of sending every year ere reckoning-day
    The tax that we are forced to pay the Romans,
    Ay, and the same of his own will to double
    If some new war has broken into blaze.
    The Roman wants our gold and nothing more,
    He leaves to us our Faith, he leaves our God,
    Would even help to do Him reverence,
    And, niched with Jupiter and Ops and Isis,
    Grant Him a corner in the Capitol
    That has been let lie vacant till to-day
    If only He, as they, were made of stone.

SAMEAS.

    If it be so, alas! and it is so,
    What have you then to hope of Antony?
    In this regard, yourself has said it, Herod
    Yields each punctilious tittle. Why, I’ve seen
    The tribute-panniers carried. One mule broke
    His backbone ere it reached the city-gate.
    For every drop of blood within his veins
    He renders up to him an ounce of gold.[8]
    Think you on your account he’ll send it back?

ALEX.

    ’Twere bootless, if I steered my cause myself,
    But Cleopatra does the deed for me,
    And, so I hope, will Mariamne too.
    Amazed? Fail not my meaning. Not in person;
    In such a case she’d rather turn on me.
    But through her picture, and not even through that,
    No, through another close resembling her.
    For as a wild wood harbours not alone
    The lion, but his foe as well, the tiger,
    So in the hot-bed of this Roman’s heart
    Ennests itself a wormy brood of passions
    Wrestling each other for the dominant place.
    And thus, if Herod builds upon the first
    I build upon the second, and I think
    That mine’s a lustier wrestler than its fellow.

SAMEAS.

    You are----

ALEX.

                   No Hyrcan, tho’ I be his daughter.
    But, lest you should misprise what I have done,
    I am not Mariamne either. If,
    To pave his way towards her, Antony
    Destroys the man that has her in possession,
    She still is mistress of herself and can
    Enwrap her in eternal widow-weeds.
    But this I hold for certain, that by now
    He’s laid his hand on sword and if not yet
    He’s drawn it, one sole point of pause detains him
    That this luck-minion among soldiers, Herod,
    Stands good to Romans for the iron ring
    That all things here with us together clamps.
    But once you furnish him with opposite proof,
    Rouse insurrection, stir the flaccid peace,
    And he will draw’t.

SAMEAS.

                       I’ll furnish easy proof!
    The folk’s already struck him dead in thought,
    They rumour that----

ALEX.

                   Impress your seal thereon!
    Then swiftly open his last testament;
    You know the contents now, the fighting-games
    Stand at the head, and then when every man
    Believes him shortened of a hundred stripes
    Through Herod’s death, or of the torture-cross,
    Then each believes what he can dare believe.
    For there are things that loom o’er Israel
    Will wring from many a heart in its despair
    The wish of agony that the Red Sea
    Had gulfed the whole folk deep into its maw
    And the twelve holy Tribes and Moses first.

SAMEAS.

    I go, and ere the midday comes----

ALEX.

                                          I know
    What you can work if you but take the sack-cloth
    And thread the lanes with wailing-cry of “woe!”
    As were your forebear Jonah here again.
    And you will find there’s service in the knack
    Of paying a chance visit to the Fisher
    And sharing Goodman Gaffer’s bite and sup
    From what he grants himself since no one buys it.

SAMEAS.

    And you will find that all we Pharisees
    Have not forgot the stigma that we suffered,
    As you would seem to reckon. Hear then now
    What only through the deed was meant to reach you--
    We have been sworn against him long ere now,
    We’ve dug our burrows under all Judaea,
    And in Jerusalem, that you may see
    How sure the count we have upon the folk,
    There’s even a blind adherent to our band!

ALEX.

    What boots he?

SAMEAS.

                Naught. He knows as much himself,
    But he’s so crammed with hate, so grim with grudge,
    That he’ll be joined with us in our emprise
    And rather perish if it should miscarry
    Than drag his life in such a world as this.
    I have a notion that’s a promising sign!

                                                                [_Exit._


SCENE 2

ALEXANDRA _alone_.

ALEX.

    The folk’s already struck him dead in thought!
    I know, I know! and by that token see
    How sore the wish that he no more returns.
    A lucky juncture that the locust-swarm
    Settled on him as he went forth! It stands
    For omen that it is no futile wish.
    It may be, too, by now an actual thing
    That, less his head--Not that! Speak as you think!
    No eavesdrop Pharisee’s before the door.
    An Antony is sure an Antony,
    Ay, but a Roman, and a Roman gives
    His verdict slow as the fulfilment’s swift.
    Prisoner he may be though he sit not yet
    Within the dungeon: and a coaxing deft
    Can lead it further. Therefore it is good
    If now rebellion come, albeit I know
    What in itself’s its import, and not less
    What aftermath it trammels up if he
    Return in Fate’s despite. If! It can happen!
    Think well upon’t! He sent you as he left
    A severed head for a farewell-reminder.
    That shows you--Pah! I speak just like my father!
    It shows me that he’s swift to the deed, as tyrants
    Are wont; and further that he’s fain to fright me.
    The one I long have known, the other shall
    Slip his intent; and if the worst should come,
    If all o’erleap its target and if he,
    Spite his infatuate love for Mariamne
    Which sooner mounts than falls and which protects me,
    Should dare his fellest once her will is won--
    What of it? On revenge is all my stake
    And that revenge would follow me in death,
    Revenge on him who did it and on her
    Who let it happen. Never would the folk
    And never Rome look on indulgent-slack,
    And then, what touches me myself, I would
    In an event so bloody all the better
    Be mated with my forebears. They were forced,
    The greater number of my stem, th’ Eld-Mothers
    As the Eld-Fathers, to forsake the world
    Short of a head because they would not bend it.
    I would but share their fate; what were it more?


SCENE 3

ALEXANDRA. MARIAMNE.

ALEXANDRA (_aside_).

    She comes! Ah, could she be decoyed from him
    And yield consent to follow me to Rome,
    Then--but she hates and loves him at a breath!
    Dare I arouse a last storm? To the deed!

                                          [_Hastening towards_ MARIAMNE.

    You seek for comfort where it may be found!
    Come to my heart!

MAR.

                 Comfort?

ALEX.

                         You need it not?
    Then I have known you ill! Yet I had grounds
    To judge you for the woman you are not.
    You have been slandered to me!

MAR.

                             I? to you?

ALEX.

    I have been told of arms enlinked and kisses
    Bestowed upon a brother-murdering consort
    Hot on the deed by--Pardon! I had no right
    To give it credence.

MAR.

                   None?

ALEX.

                       No! ever No!
    And No, on more than one ground. Could you even
    Begrudge the bloody shadow of your brother,
    All heartless, the atonement of revenge
    Sisters should sacrifice, revenge that not
    Through Judith’s sword and not through Rahab’s[9] nail,
    No, merely through a notion of the mouth
    And merely through still folding of the arms
    Were better wreaked and to the Dead devoted,
    Then he, the very murderer, had not dared
    To come anear you, for you’re like the Dead One:
    And you could hurt his sight as ’twere the corse
    Of Aristobulus tricked in woman’s paint;
    He would have turned him from you shuddering.

MAR.

    He did not do the one, nor I the other.

ALEX.

    Then be----But no, perchance a doubt still lingers
    Touching his guilt. Will you then have the proof?

MAR.

    I need it not.

ALEX.

                 You need----

MAR.

                               ’Twere bootless to me.

ALEX.

    Then--but I hold the curse even now in check,
    I see another one has lighted on you!
    You still walk in the fetters of a love
    That never shed a lustre----

MAR.

                           Yet I thought
    I had not picked a consort for myself,
    I had but yoked my neck beneath the doom
    That you and Hyrcan with a pious care
    Had hung above a daughter and a grandchild.

ALEX.

    Not I! My coward father sealed the bond.

MAR.

    And by that deed he pleased you ill?

ALEX.

                                       Not that!
    Or else I had outstripped him with our flight.
    I had a refuge open down in Egypt.
    I only say the thing was clinched by him,
    By him, the first High Priest without a spine!
    And I but battled down the first repugnance
    With which I took his meaning. Yet I did it
    Because I found the coward’s tradesman-traffic
    Good in the main, and gave for Edom’s sword
    The Pearl of Zion, when he pressed me hard.
    Yea, had the serpent had a poisoned fang
    When it was dug that time in Cleopatra,
    Or had a lucky chance brought Antony
    Toward these regions when upon his march,
    I had said no! but, as it was, said yes!

MAR.

    Yet in despite of that----

ALEX.

                             I hoped of you
    That you’d not fritter off the bargain-price,
    And touching Herod, that you----

MAR.

                       Ah, I know!
    It was my part, for every kiss I gave
    To haggle in advance for any head
    That had mispleased you, and at last when none
    Was left to cross you but his own, to spur him
    To his self-slaughter; or if that should fail,
    To couch and spy a chance in the still night
    And subtly second Judith’s catlike deed.
    Then would you have been proud to call me child!

ALEX.

    Prouder than now, I give it no denial.

MAR.

    I chose to be a wife unto the husband
    To whom your hands had led me, and for him
    Forget the Maccabean to the measure
    In which he should forget the King for me.

ALEX.

    And yet it seems in Jericho that she
    Caused you a second thought: at all events
    You were the first to break in lamentation
    When I myself still held my wailings back
    To prove you. Was’t not so?

MAR.

                           In Jericho
    The hideous hap had dizzied all my mind.
    It came too swift--From board to bath, from bath
    To grave--a brother! Whirlwinds swept my brain!
    But if against my sovereign and my husband
    I barred the door, slant-thoughted and stone-hearted,
    I rue it now, and only can condone it
    Because ’twas done as though in fever’s heat.

ALEX.

    In fever’s heat?

MAR. (_in a semi-aside_).

    I’d not have done it either
    Were he not come to me in mourning-garments!
    In red, dark red, I could have borne to see him,
    But----

ALEX.

    Ha! He found them quick! Before the deed
    He had them ordered, just as other murderers,
    Where possible, draw water ere they murder--

MAR.

    Mother, forget not!

ALEX.

                        What? That you are wife
    Unto the murderer? You’re but late become
    This creature; only while you will you are so;
    Yea, and you are so maybe now no more.
    But you have ever been the Dead One’s sister
    And will remain so--yea, you will remain so
    Even when you call--thither, it seems, you tend--
    Into his grave--“You had but justice done you!”

MAR.

    I owe you debt of reverence, and I shrink
    From violence on it; therefore hold your peace.
    Or else I could----

ALEX.

                 What could you?

MAR.

                                     Ask myself
    On whom this deed lays guilty onus--him
    That took it through because he must, or her
    Who wrung it from him! Let the Dead One rest!

ALEX.

    Speak thus to one who did not give him birth!
    I bore him underneath my heart, and must
    Avenge him since I cannot waken him
    To wreak his own revenge.

MAR.

                          Avenge him then,
    Avenge him on yourself! You know right well
    It was the High Priest whom the shouting folk
    Ringed on his giddy pinnacle with joyance
    And that ’twas not the youngling Aristobulus
    Who brought upon himself the Thing that happened.
    Who was it drove the youngling, tell me that!
    Out of his old unthinking self-content?
    Surely he lacked not coats of many colours
    Wherewith to charm the eyes of pretty maids,
    And more he needed not for happiness.
    What should he do with Aaron’s priestly mantle
    You still must hang about him to his surfeit?
    And of himself he had no other thought
    Than “Does it suit me well?” But others deemed him
    Straight from the very moment it was donned
    The second Head of Israel; and you
    Had swift success himself so to befool
    That his puffed mind must think him first and sole.

ALEX.

    ’Tis blasphemy ’gainst him and me!

MAR.

                                        ’Tis none!
    For if this youngling, who it seemed had birth
    To show the world her first-born happy man,
    If he so swift, so dark an end has found,
    And if the man who, when his sword’s once drawn
    Shames every other man into a woman,
    If he--I know not if ’twas he, but fear it,--
    Then, true, ambition, lust for power are cause,
    But not ambition that the Dead One hugged
    And not the lust for power that plagues the King.
    I’ll not accuse you--’twould beseem me ill--
    But, to requite your sending of a ghost,
    A bloody ghost, into our marriage-chamber,
    I will not see you shed the tear of rue
    Though now we twain no more are side by side
    And, for the Third, it wilders so my sense
    That I am dumb when it were well to speak
    And speak when it were better to be dumb.
    Nay, nay, I will not quench your vengeful thirst
    Nor ask what you avenge--your plans or son.
    Do what you will! go further, check your foot--
    Only, be well assured of this--the barb
    That reaches Herod reaches Mariamne!
    The oath that I withheld and he demanded
    In leaving me, I swear it now! I perish
    If he should perish! Act then, speak no more!

ALEX.

    Then perish! Now! For----

MAR.

                                Yes, I understand!
    And this was why you thought I needed comfort?
    Oh no! You err. It frights me not
    That the men-slugs o’ the world, who only suffer
    The Elect because they owe man’s debt to death,
    Have with their mouths already struck him dead.
    What has the slave for solace when the King
    In gorgeousness and glory sweeps him by
    Than this--to say, “He gets his turn like me!
    I grudge it not! And when he mounts his throne
    Fresh from a field o’erstrewn with graves in thousands
    I’ll praise him for’t: it chokes his covetous mood!”
    Ah, but my Herod lives and he will live!
    So says my heart to me. Death flings a shadow
    And that falls on me here! (_pointing to her heart_).


SCENE 4

THE SAME. JOSEPH.

                                                     [_Enter a_ SERVANT.

SERVANT.

                           The Viceroy comes!

ALEX.

    Weaponed for certain, as he always is
    When he comes our way, since he had no luck
    In cozening our wits with glozing phrases
    After the manner of his first attempt.
    Do you not know Salome at the time
    Perished for jealousy?

MAR.

                      She does so now:
    For with an intimate smile I say to him
    Most shameless things whenever she is near,
    And since herself she never tires of spying
    I never tire of soundly whipping her
    For fatuous folly.

                                                        [_Enter_ JOSEPH.

ALEX. (_pointing to_ JOSEPH’S _weapon_).

                        See you?

MAR.

                                 Let him then!
    His wife demands it so that she may dream
    She has a husband who’s a man of war.

ALEX. (_to_ JOSEPH).

    I am still here!

JOSEPH.

                                 A very strange reception!

ALEX.

    My son too is still here. As once before
    He’s hid him in the dead man’s Wooden House.
    Harry him out and I will pardon you
    Because you did it once before unbidden.
    But this time you must hunt your coffin not
    Upon a vessel sailing Egypt-bound,
    No, you must seek it in the graveyard’s belly!

JOSEPH.

    I’m not the man to wake the dead to life.

ALEX. (_with scorn directed at_ MARIAMNE).

    Ay true! or you had companied your Lord
    So that when all his kneeling and his pleading
    Were fruitless to frustrate the lictor’s axe----

MAR.

    He kneels and pleads?

JOSEPH (_to_ MARIAMNE).

    I’ll let you know his way!
    “I am impeached for this crime! I confess it!
    But not for this! Well, for your information,
    I’ll fill the gap up soon!” Yes, that’s his way.

ALEX.

    His cock crows for him?

JOSEPH.

                        He has done’t ere now,
    As I stood by, the time the Pharisees
    Would have arraigned him under Antony.
    He filed his own indictment in their stead,
    Hurried to camp before them, as he was,
    And, when they came, revised and supplemented
    The reckoning point for point and said to them--
    “Speak, if I’ve left an item out or not!”
    The event you know; a many of the accusers
    Were shorn of their thick heads since they’d not budge;
    He carried off the Roman’s fullest favour.

ALEX.

    In those days both were younger than they now are.
    The one’s superb presumption pleased the other,
    And all the more because at other’s costs,
    Not at his own, ’twas flaunted. Can the Roman
    Value the Pharisee at aught, whose tongue
    Preaches continual mutiny ’gainst Rome?
    “Who plucks his beard curtails his standing!” thought
    Mark Antony in sport: and yet I doubt
    If he’ll allow the joke against himself.

JOSEPH.

    You speak as though you wished----

ALEX.

                                  Whether our wishes
    Are paired or not, is that affair of yours?
    You hold fast to your own! For you it’s weighty
    That he returns.

JOSEPH.

                  You think so? If for me
    For you, then.

ALEX.

                 I have not a notion why
    There was in olden days an Alexandra
    Whose temples bore a crown in Israel,
    Who fell on it when it became free prey
    And would not leave it lying for a thief.
    By God, we’ll have no dearth here of a second
    If it is true (_to_ MARIAMNE) that there are Maccabeans
    Who keep their childish oaths!

JOSEPH (_sounding_ ALEXANDRA).

                                 ’Tis true indeed!
    There was in olden days this Alexandra,
    But whosoe’er will reach her goal, he must
    Tread her whole journey with no half-way lapse.
    Soon as she climbed the throne she reconciled
    Herself with all her foes, and not a soul
    Had need to fear her, only cause to hope.
    No wonder that she sat fast till her death!

MAR.

    I think that paltry! What end serves a sceptre
    If not to gratify our hate and love?
    A twig’s enough to frighten off the flies.

JOSEPH.

    Quite true. (_To_ ALEXANDRA.) And you?

ALEX.

                         She never saw in dream
    Her House’s earliest sire, the mighty Judas,
    ’Tis certain else she had no foeman shunned;
    For from his grave he still protects his children
    Because he cannot die in any heart.
    How could he so? There’s never a man can pray
    Who must not say--“To him I owe my thanks
    That I may yet kneel down before my God
    And not to bronze and wood and stone.”

JOSEPH (_aside_).

                                         The King
    Was in the right! The deed I must accomplish,
    And that on both, or else endure them both.
    I must emplant the crown upon my brow
    If I’d ensure it from the headsman’s axe.
    For here a world of hate stares in against me.
    Then good! Their sentence they’ve pronounced themselves.
    For the last time I’ve put the test on them.
    Were but his courier here, this very moment
    I’d bring it to a pitiless consummation.
    Each several preparation has been made.


SCENE 5

THE SAME. TITUS.

    _Afterwards_, PHILO.

                                                     [_Enter a_ SERVANT.

SERVANT.

    Titus the Captain craves an audience.

JOSEPH (_about to go_).

    At once!

ALEX.

            And why not here?

SERVANT.

                          He’s here already

                                                         [_Enter_ TITUS.

TITUS (_in a whispered aside to Joseph_).

    What you have feared is come about; the folk
    Rebels!

JOSEPH.

           Be quick then, do what I’ve commanded!
    Call out your cohort! Put it into action!

TITUS.

    Already done! And now I come to ask you
    Whether you wish for prisoners or dead.
    My eagle grips as thoroughly as he mangles
    And you must know which better serves your ends.

JOSEPH.

    Blood must not flow.

TITUS.

                         Good. Then the hewing starts
    Before they get their stoning well begun,
    Else I had done it later.

JOSEPH.

                      Saw you Sameas?

TITUS.

    The Pharisee who once had nearly blundered
    His head against my shield because his eyes
    He always shuts as soon as e’er he spies me?
    I saw him sure enough!

JOSEPH.

                   And how? Speak loud!

TITUS.

    In the open market-place ringed round by thousands
    And cursing Herod loudly.

JOSEPH (_to_ ALEXANDRA).

                             Sameas
    Took leave of you but one short hour ago.

ALEX.

    Saw you’t?

TITUS (_to_ JOSEPH).

            You show yourself?

JOSEPH.

                                   Soon as I can.
    Meanwhile----

TITUS.

           ’Tis good. I go. (_About to go._)

ALEX.

                            A word yet, Captain!
    Say why the guard’s recalled from us.

MAR.

                                    Is’t missing?

ALEX.

    Missing since yester-evening.

JOSEPH.

                               Since I bade it.

TITUS.

    And since the King in leaving said to me--
    “Before you is the man who knows my will.
    What he commands, that I command myself!”

                                                                [_Exit._

ALEX. (_to_ JOSEPH).

    And you?

JOSEPH.

             I thought that Judas Maccabaeus
    Were guard enough for you and for your daughter.
    And, for the rest, you hear how matters stand
    Without. I need the soldiers. (_Aside._) If the Romans
    Were near as this, I might have little luck.
    To-day I stationed Galileans.

ALEX. (_to_ MARIAMNE).

                                 Think you
    That my mistrust is groundless still?

MAR.

                                    I know not,
    But now its sting infects. I feel ’tis strange!
    And yet--If from the wall a javelin darted
    It had not tricked my expectation more.

ALEX.

    Two thrusts, and then the throneward way is free:
    For when the Maccabeans are no more
    The turn comes round for the Herodians.

MAR.

    I’d laugh you yet to ridicule if only
    His wife were not Salome. By my brother
    Her head is mine! For I shall say to Herod,
    “As you avenge me on her so you love me!”
    For she--’tis she! never that fellow there!

ALEX.

    Too early triumph! Our first call is action
    And I’ve a notion we can use this outbreak.

MAR.

    This outbreak! Nay. I wash my hands of it,
    Because, if Herod comes again, there’s naught
    For me to fear: and if he come no more
    A death in any shape’s right opportune.

ALEX.

    I go.

                                                         [_Turns to go._

JOSEPH (_blocking her way_).

         Where?

ALEX.

                Firstly to the battlements
    And then wherever it may please me go.

JOSEPH.

    Your way is open to the battlements.
    The castle’s barred.

ALEX.

                      ’Twould seem, then, we are prisoners?

JOSEPH.

    Only till peace may be restored, no longer.
    I must request----

ALEX.

                  What brass effrontery’s this?

JOSEPH.

    A stone is blind, a Roman javelin too;
    They often find a mark where they should not;
    ’Twere therefore more discreet to give them room.

ALEX. (_to_ MARIAMNE).

    I’ll go aloft and try with signalling
    To make our friends acquainted with our plight.

MAR.

    By signalling--your friends--Oh, Mother, Mother!
    And so ’tis you at bottom, not the folk?
    See to’t the pit you dig trips not yourself.

                                               [ALEXANDRA _turns to go_.

JOSEPH.

    You will permit my guardsman offer you
    His escort. Philo!

ALEX.

                 So ’tis open war?

  [_Enter_ PHILO. JOSEPH _speaks with him, at first softly, then aloud_.

JOSEPH.

    You understand?

PHILO.

                      Yes.

JOSEPH.

                          I’ the worst event!

PHILO.

    For that I’ll wait, then----

JOSEPH.

                                And your head’s my surety.
    (_Aside._) Methinks the soul of Herod’s over me!

ALEX.

    I go in his despite. Perhaps the soldier,
    Although a Galilean, may be won.
    I’ll try it!

                                             [_Exit, followed by_ PHILO.

JOSEPH (_aside_).

                 I can do no otherwise,
    Howe’er it bring mistrust on me; the outbreak
    Compels me to this step; I dare not now
    Allow her from my sight unless I make
    The dead impossible through my own folly,
    For every hour this courier may come.
    Himself I long have thought to see no more.

MAR.

    Say, when died Herod?

JOSEPH.

                      When died he?

MAR.

                                       And how?
    You surely know it since you dare so much.

JOSEPH.

    What do I dare then? You propose me riddles.

MAR.

    Naught, if you think I cannot find defence
    So soon as e’er the Romans think my life
    Is threatened; all, if you mistake therein.

JOSEPH.

    Who threatens then your life?

MAR.

                            You ask me still?
    You!

JOSEPH.

        I?

MAR.

          And can you swear the contrary?
    Swear it upon your child’s head? You are silent!

JOSEPH.

    You have no right of challenge to the swearing.

MAR.

    Who hears such challenge gives it of himself,
    But woe to you if Herod comes again!
    I’ll say to him two things ere the first kiss,
    I’ll say to him that you devised my murder,
    I’ll say to him my oath; now gauge yourself
    The fate that gathers for you if he comes.

JOSEPH.

    And what--what was the oath?  If it bring horror
    Yet I must know it.

MAR.

                  Hear it to your bane!
    That I with my own hand will kill myself
    If he--oh had I but foreboded _this_
    I had not turned me with a cold good-bye,
    Nay, surely not! I would have kept the bearing
    I had begun, and all would now be well,
    For you at first were a far other man.

JOSEPH.

    For me, I’ve naught to fear.

MAR.

                                  Because you think
    It is impossible that he return.
    Who knows? And if! I hold the oath I swore,
    But not till I avenge myself on you,
    Avenge me on you--hear the word and tremble!
    Sharp as he would avenge me. Come then, draw
    Your instant sword! You dare not? I believe you!
    And watch me close as e’er you can, I’ll find
    A certain way unto the Captain Titus.
    You lost your hazard when I pierced your husk.

JOSEPH (_aside_).

    True, true! (_To_ MARIAMNE.) I hold you to your word! You’d take
    The same, the very vengeance he would wreak;
    That vow you swore to me: forget it not.

MAR.

    So speaks a wandering wit. That Herod loves me,
    Yea, loves me more than I can love myself,
    There’s none can doubt; no, not Salome even,
    Your sinister-hearted wife, although she double
    Just for that cause her hate, and even although
    Just for that cause, and spurred by vengeful lust,
    She may have filled you with this murder-thought.
    And that it comes from her I know, and will
    Pierce to her feeling nerve; her pain for you
    Shall be my latest joy upon this earth.

JOSEPH.

    You err. But that’s all one: I have your word.

MAR.

    You say that once again? You--impious!
    Oh what an uprush of night-spawnéd thoughts
    And what mistrust you wake within my breast!
    You speak such words as though I had been chosen
    For altar-beast and you for altar-priest--
    By Herod’s very self. Is’t so? At parting
    There fell from him--I think thereon with horror--
    A word of darkness. Answer!

JOSEPH.

                       This I give,
    Soon as the need shall come, soon as I know
    That he----

MAR.

           No more can give you level lie,
    If you, poltroon and vile, charged him with what
    Numbs thought with fear, unmeasured and unnamed,
    To sweep your own name sweet in my esteem?
    I tell you, I but listen to you now
    Since now, perhaps, before I make an end,
    He may step through the door and strike you down.
    Be silent then for aye or speak at once.

JOSEPH.

    And if ’twere so? I say not it is so,
    But if it were? What other would it be
    Than confirmation of the thing you feel,
    Than noble proof he loves as ne’er before
    A man has loved his wife?

MAR.

                        What is’t you say?
    Methinks my ears have heard that word before!

JOSEPH.

    Why, I’d have thought ’twould please your quick of pride
    To know he felt not death was half so bitter
    As this, the thought he’d----

MAR.

                         Come, what will you stake
    Myself can bring it for you to an end?
    --As this, the thought he’d leave me here behind him
    Amid a world where lives an Antony.

JOSEPH.

    Well--yes then! But I say not that he’s said it--

MAR.

    He’s said it? He has--Oh, what has he not?
    Oh, that he came to end it!

JOSEPH.

                       Mariamne!
    (_Aside._) My feet are in the gin! True, I did naught
    But what I must; and yet a horror grips me
    That he--before my eyes comes Aristobulus.
    Accurséd be the dead that flings a shadow
    Ere it steps into life!

MAR.

    Like to a crazy blister of the brain
    Whose swollen puffiness at times will split,
    So was it--From this hour my life begins.
    Until to-day I dreamed!


SCENE 6

THE SAME. SALOME.

                               [_Enter a_ SERVANT, _followed by_ SALOME.

SALOME (_to the_ SERVANT).

                            Were you forbidden
    To grant to any entry unannounced?
    I take the blame.

JOSEPH.

              Salome, you?

SALOME.

                             Who else?
    No evil ghost! Your wife, your hapless wife
    Whom once you wooed as Jacob wooed his Rachel
    And whom you now----(_To_ MARIAMNE.) Accurséd, was’t not even
    Enough for you to turn away from me
    My brother’s heart? And must you now go further
    And rob me of my husband? Day and night
    He thinks of you as though you were a widow
    Even now, and I still less than that. By day
    He dogs your goings step by step; by night
    He dreams of you, calls out your name in anguish
    And starts up from his slumber--(_To_ JOSEPH.) Did I not
    Chide you this morning for’t? And now to-day;
    When all Jerusalem is in an uproar,
    To-day he’s not with me, not at the market,
    Where I bade seek him, since he never came.
    He is with you, and ye--ye are alone!

MAR.

    Then sure it is not she; it is himself!
    If any remnant-doubt still gave me pause
    ’Tis choked by this insensate jealousy.
    I was a thing to him and nothing more.

JOSEPH (_to_ SALOME).

    I swear----

SALOME.

                That I am blind? No, no--I see!

MAR.

    The dying man whose will decreed his fig-tree
    Be hewn to earth because he grudged its fruits
    After his death to any other man,
    The dying man were execrate, and had,
    It may be, sown the tree himself and knew
    That any thief, that even any murderer
    Who shook its boughs must share its quickening gift--
    But neither fits my case. And yet, and yet
    That is an outrage Time has yet not known.

SALOME (_to_ JOSEPH).

    You speak in vain. Commission? What commission?

MAR.

    Commission? Ah, that seals it! If it could be,
    Now surely, now if never it could be.
    Ah, but it cannot be! There is no impulse
    Of baser sort that spots my innermost
    For all my stormy-ridden breast. I would
    Now at this moment give to Antony
    The answer, yea the very self-same answer
    I would have given him on our wedding-day.
    It wounds me as it wounds because I feel it,
    Else were I bound to suffer, yea, to pardon.

SALOME (_to_ MARIAMNE).

    It seems for you I am not!

MAR.

                                 Nay, far from it!
    Indeed you have bestowed on me the greatest
    That kindness could. I, who was blind, now see;
    I see full clear and that through you alone.

SALOME.

    You void your scorn on me?  That too I’ll penance
    If but my brother come again. I will
    Relate him all----

MAR.

                  What? Ay, ’tis well! Do so!
    If he give ear--why not? Why do I laugh?
    Is that too past belief? If he give ear
    Then hear my word--I will gainsay you not.
    I love myself no more enough to do it.

                                             [_Enter hastily_ ALEXANDRA.

ALEX.

    The King!

JOSEPH.

            Within the town?

ALEX.

                         By now i’ the castle!




ACT III

SCENE 1

_The Castle on Zion._ ALEXANDRA’S _Apartments_. ALEXANDRA. JOSEPH.
SALOME.

_Enter_ HEROD, SOEMUS, _and Retinue_.

HEROD.

    I’m home again. (_To_ SOEMUS.) Does it stil bleed? The stone,
    Though meant for me, hit you because in just
    That nick of time you came to tell me something.
    Your head for this time made your King a shield,
    But had you stayed at post----

SOEMUS.

                           I had not then
    Received the wound nor rendered you the service,
    If it be worth the name. In Galilee
    That man is stoned at least who’s so foolhardy
    To get at loggerheads with you and me,
    Since I’m your shadow or your speaking-trumpet
    Or what you will.

HEROD.

               Yes, there the men are true--
    That is, to ends of theirs; and since these ends
    With mine go hand in hand, to mine as well.

SOEMUS.

    How true this token shows you--that you find
    Myself in your chief city.

HEROD.

                       Ay, indeed
    I had not thought that I would meet you here,
    For when the King is far there’s double need
    Among the stiff-necked provinces for watchers.
    What was it then that drove you from your post?
    ’Twas sure some other impulse than the wish
    To prove me that it might unjeopardised
    Lie tenantless; or thought’s instinctive feel
    That a flung stone was here to intercept.

SOEMUS.

    I was come here to advertise the viceroy
    Touching disclosures of a wondrous kind,
    And tell them orally in all due haste.
    I would apprise him that the Pharisees
    Seek even the stubborn soil of Galilee,
    Although their work is vain, to underburrow.
    But all too late my warning came; I found
    Jerusalem in flames by then, and could
    But help extinguish them.

HEROD (_giving him his hand_).

                              And that you did
    With blood of yours!--Ah, Joseph! you? Good-day!
    I thought to find you other here; but good;
    Yet, for the nonce, go bring me Sameas
    The Pharisee, who’s held by Captain Titus
    A prisoner in the mode the Scythians use.
    The ironside Roman drags him, fastly bounden
    Unto the tail of the war-horse he rides,
    Hither and thither, since the holy zealot
    Spat after him i’ the open market-place.
    Now he must run as he may ne’er before
    Have run if he’s no mind to have a tumble
    And go a-draggling. Then and there ’twere better
    That I had rescued him as I went past.
    I’ faith, ’tis sure I owe him thanks alone
    That all the serpents who until to-day
    Crawled stilly from my foot, are known to me.
    Now I can stamp them piecemeal when I will.

                                                         [_Exit_ JOSEPH.

    (_To_ ALEXANDRA.) I give you greeting, and from Antony
    I am to make announcement that a river
    Cannot be brought to judgment; and a King
    Within whose land it flows with less of right
    Because he did not earth it in. (_To_ SOEMUS.) I were
    Long since again come hither, but when friends
    Together meet who seldom see each other,
    They hold them fast. And so ’twill be with you
    (I treat you with a foretaste) now I’m host
    And have you at the longed-for last again.
    And you with me must set the figs a-shaking
    Just as, perforce, I aided Antony,
    Pah, gluttony! in stream of old Falernian
    To smother lampreys and call many a prank
    From out our bygone times to jog remembrance
    With freshening fillip. So, resolve your mind
    To do like service. If I scarce may have
    Enough of the triumphant hero in me
    To have you so commanded to my presence
    As he commanded me to his, with show
    Of hearing me on some insipid charge,
    His brow like Cæsar’s wrinkled and his arm
    With lightning and with thunderbolt beweaponed,
    And all to be assured--this was the ground
    On which he did it--that I came for certain,
    If such be so, at least to-day’s good chance
    That puts you in my hands I’ll use to profit
    And say, as he, when speeches on your office
    Begin--“If you conduct it as you should
    It does not need your every wink o’ the eye.
    You come so seldom that it seems you’re loath
    To be here!”

SOEMUS.

              Lord, you do me an injustice;
    And yet I have no cause to come too often.

HEROD (_to_ SALOME).

    And you here too? So you have learnt at last
    To trick your wits, when you meet Mariamne,
    With fancy-thoughts that you look in a mirror
    And spy your own reflected counterpart?
    ’Twas oft my counsel when you eyed her sourly;
    It never pleased. Take not the jest amiss.
    There is no evil doing in the hour
    When friends are come a-meeting. But where is she?
    I heard it said that she was with her mother
    And so came here.

SALOME.

              She went when she had learnt
    That you were nearing.

HEROD.

                   Went? Impossible!
    But good. She did it since ’tis solitude
    Befits reunion. (_Aside._) Heart, will you bear her anger
    Nor rather make amends? (_Aloud._) I follow her;
    Her delicate feeling’s right.

SALOME.

                         Go, self-deceiver!
    The fright of seeing you recalled to life,
    The shame of having credited your death,
    The greater shame of her spoiled widowhood--
    O’ersmooth it all with fondling gloss of shyness
    The maiden feels who ne’er has known a man
    Nor seen the shivering woman taken in sin!
    She went from fear!

HEROD.

                From fear? Look round about you,
    We are not here alone.

SALOME.

                  That’s opportune!
    If before witnesses I bring my plaint
    It will be guaranteed your surer ear
    And crushed the harder underfoot.

HEROD.

                               You place
    Yourself twixt her and me? Have then a care!
    You may be trampled piecemeal.

SALOME.

                          This time, not!
    Although I know how small the sister counts
    When you are dealing with the Maccabean,
    This time----

HEROD.

           I tell you one thing! If, the day
    On which she first was given to my sight,
    A man were risen in accusation ’gainst her,
    He had not easily obtained my hearing,
    But yet more easily than now. Take that for warning.
    I am so heavy in her debt that she
    Can owe no debt to me. I feel that deep.

SALOME.

    Ah, so she has free charter?

HEROD.

                                 Any mask
    To wear that she thinks well for your hoodwinking
    If she would kill the drive of time with you.

SALOME.

    Then--then I must be mute. What use in speaking?
    For whatsoe’er I chose to tell you, ever
    Your answer would be ready--mummery!
    At least this mummery has had good luck.
    Not me alone but all the world with me
    It’s taken by the ear; it costs you honour
    And me my rest, however you may swear
    That Joseph’s only done what duty bade
    When he--see to’t if any man believe you!

HEROD.

    When he--what underdrift is lurking? End it!
    But no--not yet----(_To a servant._) I bid the Queen be craved
    To grant to us her presence. Is it not
    As though the whole o’ the world were spider-clean
    And all had nested them within my house,
    That when for once I see the blue of Heaven
    They forthwith might o’erhang it with their webs
    And do the work of clouds? True, strange it is
    That she comes not. She should, sheer-forced, have kissed me
    Caught in the ungoverned all-compelling moment,
    And then she might have vexed her lips with biting
    When even at that the Ghost refused its quittance.
    (_To_ SALOME.) Know you what you have ventured? Know you, woman?
    I was rejoiced! D’you understand? And now--
    Once on a day the Earth when I was thirsty
    Spilled from my hand a goblet filled with wine
    Because it fell to quaking ere my lips
    Could drain it; I forgave it since I must;
    On you I could avenge me.

                                                      [_Enter_ MARIAMNE.


SCENE 2

HEROD. MARIAMNE. ALEXANDRA. SALOME.


HEROD.

                       Fling you down
    Before her, who in all these witness-eyes
    Have put the offending tarnish on her name,
    And I’ll not do it!

SALOME.

                 Ha!

ALEX.

                      What may that mean?

HEROD.

    Well, Mariamne?

MAR.

                    What commands the King?
    I have been summoned and I have appeared.

ALEX.

    Is this the wife who swore to kill herself
    If he returned not hither?

HEROD.

                       This your greeting?

MAR.

    The King bade summon me that I should greet him?
    I greet him; and thereby the work is done.

ALEX.

    You’re sore in error. Here you stand arraigned.

HEROD.

    There was a charge preferred. Before I gave
    The charge a hearing I sent word to beg you
    Come hither, but in truth with no desire
    That you should counter it with your defence,
    Only because I think that of itself
    ’Twill lose its breath and die before your presence.

MAR.

    To hinder that I should again begone.

HEROD.

    What, Mariamne? You were never ranked
    Among those souls of despicable kind
    Who, when their foeman’s countenance or back
    Comes to first gaze, forgive and fresh their grudging
    Because they are too weak for genuine hate,
    Too tiny for the fuller, greater mood.
    By what then is your deepest so transformed
    That now so late you should companion them?
    What? When I left you had for me farewell
    And I had thought that this a claim would give me
    Upon your welcome. You deny me that?
    And you stand here as though the berg and vale
    Still lay between that kept us so long sundered?
    You step aback when I would come anear?
    Is’t then that my return is hateful to you?

MAR.

    How should it be? Indeed it gives my life
    Again to me.

HEROD.

               Your life? What word is this?

MAR.

    You’ll not deny you understand the word.

HEROD (_aside_).

    Can she then know it? (_To_ MARIAMNE.) Come!

                                            [MARIAMNE _does not follow_.

                                               Leave us alone!
    (_To_ ALEXANDRA.) You’ll pardon?

ALEX.

                 Ay!

                                        [_Exit, followed by the others._

MAR.

                     So craven, then!

HEROD.

                                   So craven?

MAR.

    And also--how’s it nameable?

HEROD.

                               And also?
    (_Aside._) ’Twere horrible! I’d never quench it in her!

MAR.

    His wife, free-willed, may grave-ward follow him,
    The headsman’s hand may thrust her under earth--
    All’s one if he make sure she dies. He leaves her
    No time even for self-sacrificial death.

HEROD.

    She knows it!

MAR.

                   And is Antony a man
    As I till now believed, a man like you,
    Or else a demon, as you must believe
    Since you’re in desperate doubt if in my bosom
    Some last lorn duty-sense, some remnant pride
    Would make a stand against him when, all dripping
    With blood of yours, he faced me as a wooer
    And made assault of storm to pass the time
    Which the Egyptian Woman leaves him free?

HEROD (_aside_).

    But how? but how?

MAR.

                       At least he were compelled
    To have you dead before he came a-wooing,
    And if you feel yourself--I were not able
    To think it, but I see’t--so null a nithing
    That you despair his scale to counterpoise
    With the pure metal of your manhood’s worth
    In your wife’s heart, what justifies you then
    To hold my worth so light that you could fear
    Myself would never spurn the murderer back?
    O double insult!

HEROD (_breaking out_).

                     Tell me for what price
    You learnt this secret! ’Twas not lightly venal!
    A head was pledged me for it!

MAR.

                                O Salome,
    How well you knew your brother!--Question him
    Whose treachery told me what he had received.
    From me expect to hear no answer more.

                                                      [_She turns away._

HEROD.

    I’ll show you quickly how I’ll question him!
    Soemus!

                                                        [_Enter_ SOEMUS.


SCENE 3

HEROD. MARIAMNE. SOEMUS.

HEROD.

                Is my kinsman Joseph here?

SOEMUS.

    He’s tarrying with Sameas.

HEROD.

                               Lead him hence!
    I gave a letter to him. Have the letter
    Forthwith delivered. You afford him escort
    And see that all be loyally fulfilled
    Whatever this letter orders.

SOEMUS.

                        ’Twill be done.

                                                                [_Exit._

HEROD.

    Whate’er you may suspect or think or know,
    You have misprised me.

MAR.

                    On a brother’s murder
    The seal you’ve planted of necessity
    To which the neck must bow though sharp the shudder,
    But you’ll ne’er have the plausible success
    To stamp this seal upon my murder too;
    That murder must remain the thing it is,
    An outrage that at most may be repeated
    But never, never can be overgone.

HEROD.

    I would not have the courage for an answer
    Unless, whatever the deed I may have ventured,
    I had not been assured of the event;
    But then I was assured and was so only
    Because I set my all upon the hazard.
    I did what on the field of fight the soldier
    Is wont to do when all his last’s at stake.
    He flings the standard which has led him onward,
    On which his fortunes and his honour hang,
    Determined in the mellay of the foemen
    But not because he thinks to give’t for spoil.
    He brings the wreath, which now no more by courage
    Only by hope forlorn was to be reached,
    The victory-wreath, albeit tattered, with him.
    You called me craven. If the man is so
    Who fears a seated demon in himself,
    Then I at times am craven, but alone
    When I must reach my goal on crooked by-paths,
    When I must duck my head and make a show
    As though I were no more the man I am.
    Then anguish takes me that I might too soon
    Erect my bearing, and to tame my pride,
    Which, lightly strung, might spur me on thereto,
    I knit into me what is more than Self
    And which with me must stand or suffer fall.
    Know you what waited on me as I went?
    No dual fight, and less by far a court;
    A tyrant whimsy-willed to whom I must
    Forswear myself, and yet I surely had
    Forsworn no tittle if--I thought of you
    And gnashed my teeth not once--and whatsoe’er
    He may have bid the Man and King within me,
    Haling me on from gorge to gorge, yet holding
    My teasing quittance back in sinister silence
    --I took it all as patient as a slave.

MAR.

    You speak in vain. In me humanity
    Is shamed by you. My pain each soul must share.
    Who’s human is like me, nor has he need
    To be my kin, or woman as I am.
    When you with murder secret-still had robbed
    My brother, only they could share my weeping
    Who might have brothers; and the rest might all
    With eyes still dry of tears, step from me sidewards
    Refusing me their pity. But a life
    Has every man, and none allows his life
    Be taken from him but by God alone
    Who was the Giver of it. Such an outrage
    Is damned by mankind’s universal race,
    Is damned by Fate who suffered it begin,
    ’Tis true, but not succeed; is damned by you.
    And if the Human in me is through you
    So deeply hurt, what must the woman feel?
    How stand I now to you and you to me?


SCENE 4

HEROD. MARIAMNE. SALOME.

SALOME (_entering hastily_).

    What plan you, Man of Horror? Ah, I see
    My husband led away; and he conjures me
    Beseech you for your mercy--but I wavered
    Because I bear him grudge nor understand him,
    And now--and now I hear things gruesome whispered.
    They say--they lie! Say so!

HEROD.

                         Your husband dies!

SALOME.

    Before he is condemned? Ah, never, never!

HEROD.

    Himself is his condemner; for the letter
    That forfeits him to death was in his hands
    Before he played me traitor, and he knew
    What penalty it was awaited him
    If done; he put him ’neath that penalty
    And in its spite he did it.

SALOME.

                       Herod, hear me!
    Do you know that for sure? I did accuse him
    And felt beneath my charge the base of right;
    I had my grounds therefor--and that he loved her
    Was open fact; he had indeed for me
    No single further glance, no press of hand--
    He was by day about her when he could be.
    And in the night his dreams betrayed to me
    How firm she held his thought in grip; all that
    Is true and more; but, for all that, it follows
    Not yet that she must love him in requital
    And less than all that she--ah no, ah no!
    ’Twas jealousy that tore me on--forgive!
    (_To_ MARIAMNE.) You too forgive!
    O God, and time flies fast! They said--shall I
    Then love you as I hated you? Then be
    No longer dumb! Speak! Say that he is guiltless
    And plead for his reprieve even as myself.

MAR.

    He is!

HEROD.

         In her construction, not in mine.

MAR.

    In yours as well.

HEROD.

                   You must then have known nothing;
    And now a nothing can be his excuse.
    And if I make him now a gift to death
    Without foretrial, ’tis because my will
    Is bent to show you that my thought of you
    Is nowise base and mean, and that I rue
    The rash-born word that fell from my first wrath,
    And more because I know that he can have
    Nothing to say to me.

                                                        [_Enter_ SOEMUS.


SCENE 5

THE SAME. SOEMUS.

SOEMUS.

                      The bloody work
    Is brought to end; but all Jerusalem
    Stands stock-still asking why the man whom you
    Ordained to represent your person when you
    Made journey hence, now at your coming back
    Should be compelled to lose his head.

SALOME (_collapsing_).

                                        Woe’s me!

                                          [MARIAMNE _goes to catch her_.

SALOME.

    Away, away! (_To_ HEROD.) And she?

HEROD.

                                       Content you, sister!
    Your husband has most heinously deceived me--

SALOME.

    And she?

HEROD.

              What you think is not so.

SALOME.

                                      Not so?
    How then? Your will’s to save her? If my husband
    Deceived you heinously she did it too;
    For what I said is true, and every man
    Shall know it though he not yet know. And you
    Shall wash yourself in her blood as in his,
    Else ne’er be clean again. At least that’s so![10]

HEROD.

    By all that I hold sacred----

SALOME.

                                 Nay then, name
    His misdeed to me if it were not such.

HEROD.

    Were I to name it I would make it greater.
    There was a secret I’d entrusted to him
    On which my All was hanging, and this secret
    He has betrayed; shall I then do the same?

SALOME.

    Pitiful shuffling for my scare contrived!
    You think you can outwit me? You believe
    In all that I have said, and yet you are
    Too strengthless-willed your love to understifle
    And rather choose the shrine to overcloak
    That you’ll not stamp to nothing. But unless
    You murder me, your sister, with my husband,
    It will miscarry with you. (_To_ MARIAMNE.) He is dead!
    Now you can swear what pleases you; he will
    Not contradict you!

                                                                [_Exit._

HEROD.

                Follow her, Soemus,
    And seek to win her to a calm! You know her
    And she ere now has given you willing ear.

SOEMUS.

    Those times are now no longer; but I go!

                                                                [_Exit._

MAR. (_aside_).

    For him who meant my murder I might well
    Be loath to supplicate; and yet I shudder
    That not the respite even for that was left me.

HEROD (_aside_).

    ’Twas soon or late with him! In the next war
    He had been stationed in Uriah’s place!
    And yet I rue this hasty hotness now.

                                                     [_Enter_ A COURIER.


SCENE 6

HEROD. MARIAMNE. A COURIER.

COURIER.

    I’m sent by Antony!

HEROD.

                         Ah, then I know
    What you are bringing me. I must make ready!
    The final feud of which he spoke begins.

COURIER.

    Octavian, making course for Africa,
    Has taken ship; to meet him Antony
    Sets out in haste with Cleopatra joined
    Intending instant close at Actium----

HEROD.

    And I, I, Herod, am to make the third!
    ’Tis good! I make the march to-day. Soemus,
    For all this sorry plight of things, supplies me.
    Good that he came!

MAR.

                 Once more he marches forth!
    Eternal One, my thanks!

HEROD (_observing her_).

                            Ha!

COURIER.

                        Great King, no!
    He needs you not at Actium; he wills
    That the Arabians, who have raised rebellion,
    Be blocked by you from coupling with the foemen.
    This is the service he would have of you.

HEROD.

    It lies with him that place to delegate
    Where I shall profit him.

MAR.

                         Once more! Then all
    Is fresh unravelled!

HEROD (_as before_).

                         How my wife is glad!
    (_To the_ COURIER.) Tell him--you know’t already--
                                     (_Aside._) Brow unwrinkled
    And hands as though for thankful prayer enfolded--
    That is her heart!

COURIER.

                     Have you naught else for me?

MAR.

    Now will I know if it were but a fever,
    The fever of a passion frenzy-fired
    That madded his poised mind, or if I saw
    His innermost in clear sane deed betrayed.
    Now will I know!

HEROD (_to the_ COURIER).

                    Naught, naught!

                                                        [_Exit_ COURIER.

                    (_To_ MARIAMNE.) Your countenance
    Has taken gladder glow! But do not hope
    Too much. One does not always die in war.
    I’ve cheated many a one ere now.

MAR. (_about to speak, but interrupting herself_).

                                    No, no!

HEROD.

    The issue now involves a hotter fight
    Than then, I grant you. Every fight beside
    Was waged for something in the world, but this
    Is waged for the world’s self; it makes decisive
    Who’s destinied world-master--Antony,
    Wencher and trencherman, or else Octavian
    Who’s empty of his merit when he swears
    That he was never drunken in his life.
    There’ll be a pretty buffet-bout, and yet
    It may be that your wish be not fulfilled,
    That Death may pass me with unbloodied sword.

MAR.

    My wish! ’Tis well! My wish--then it is good.
    O Heart, be quelled! Betray you not! The proving
    Is none if he should sense what quicks your throb.
    If he stand proof how you will be rewarded!
    And how you can reward him! Let him then
    Misprise you. Prove him. Think upon the end,
    And on the garland you dare reach to him--
    When he has trod the Demon underfoot.

HEROD.

    I give you thanks; you now have brought my heart
    A lightening. Though on the human in you
    I may have done no outrage, this is clear--
    That I have done no outrage on your love;
    And, for this reason, by your love I beg you
    Not for one final sacrifice, yet hope
    That you will yield to me one final duty.
    And this I hope not for my sake alone,
    I hope it for your own sake even more,
    You will not wish that, at this latest hour,
    I see you mistily; you will for this--
    That I myself the dead man’s mouth have locked,
    Open your own and clear my wondering
    How it has come he made his head your gift.
    And you will do it for the human in you,
    You’ll do it, too, because you honour Self.

MAR.

    Because I honour Self I’ll do it not.

HEROD.

    So you yourself refuse the fair and fitting?

MAR.

    The fair and fitting! So ’twere fair and fitting
    That I, on knees before you in abjection,
    Swear “Lord, your villein came me not anigh!
    And that you may believe--for to your faith
    I have no right, albeit I am your wife--
    Hear this thing yet and that!” O fie, O fie![11]
    No Herod! If your itching later ask
    I answer you--perhaps. Now I am dumb.

HEROD.

    But if you had been large enough of loving
    To grant me grace for all that, out of loving,
    I did, I never would have asked you thus.
    Now that I know how small your love is, now
    I must re-ask the question; for whate’er
    Your love vouchsafe me as a bond of surety
    Cannot be greater than your love itself.
    And Love to which Life is a treasure higher
    Than the Beloved, is to me a nothing.

MAR.

    Yet am I silent!

HEROD.

                  Then I damn myself
    The mouth whose overpride disdains to swear
    No other one has kissed it, nevermore
    Myself to kiss till such it lowly do.
    Yea, if there were a means could give me potence
    Your memory within my heart t’ extinguish,
    And if the drastic stab that pierced my eyes,
    Oblivioning the mirror of your beauty,
    Could also give your image to oblivion,
    Now at this very hour I’d stab them through.

MAR.

    Be your mood’s master, Herod! For perhaps
    Even in this Now you’ve Fate within your hands
    And you can guide it wheresoe’er you will.
    To every man there comes the point of time
    When to himself the steerer of his star
    Gives o’er the reins. And this alone is ill--
    That he knows not the point of time; it may be
    Each one that past him rolls. I have monition
    For you ’tis this one; therefore keep a check!
    The track of life your chart is now designing,
    That track, perchance, unto the end you wander.
    Will you do that in the wild rush of wrath?

HEROD.

    I fear but half the truth’s in your monition.
    The turning-point is there, but ’tis for you.
    For I, what wish I then? why this--naught further,
    A means wherewith to frighten bogy-dreams.[12]

MAR.

    I’ll understand you not! I’ve borne you children,
    Have thought of them! Then you may ask yourself
    What’s possible.

HEROD.

             Who’s silent, even as you,
    Wakes the misthought he has no heart that dares
    To say the truth, yet has no will to lie.

MAR.

    No further!

HEROD.

             Nay, no further; and farewell!
    And if I come again misgrudge it me
    Not all too sorely.

MAR.

                  Herod!

HEROD.

                      Be assured
    I take no more the thing I took to-day,
    A greeting wrested.

MAR.

                  Nay, ’twill be no more
    A needful thing. (_To Heaven._) Eternal, guide his heart!
    I gave him pardon for a brother’s murder,
    I was prepared his deathward way to follow,
    I am so still; and can a mortal more?
    Thou didst what ne’er before thou didst--Thou rolledst
    The wheel of time aback; it stands once more
    Even as it erewhile stood. Then let him now
    Take other course, and I forget what’s happened.
    Forget it even as if in heat of fever
    He’d dealt me with his sword the stroke of death
    And bound himself my wound that I grew whole.
    (_To_ HEROD.) You’ll come again?

HEROD.

                             If you should see me coming
    Then call for fetters. Let it be your proof
    That I have gotten crazy wits.

MAR.

                             You will
    Repent that word--oh, Heart, be quelled!--you will!

                                                               [_Exit._


SCENE 7

HEROD _alone_.

HEROD.

    ’Tis true I went too far. When half-way launched
    I told myself the same. But not less true
    If she loved me the offence she would condone.
    If she loved me! Has she loved, truth to truth?
    I think it. Ay, but now--oh, how the Dead One
    Is skilled to vengeance even in the grave!
    I made away with him my crown t’ assure,
    He took what dipped the heavier scale--her heart.
    For she has shown me since her brother died
    Strange alteration; though my nice regard
    Has never found between her and her mother
    The tiniest tell-tale vestige of resemblance,
    To-day showed more than once the linking touches;
    Thus I can give no more the old-time faith.
    That is a surety; must it therefore be
    An equal surety that she has deceived?
    The guarantee that in her love had lain
    Is fallen away, but still there is a second
    Lies in that pride of hers; will not a pride,
    Superb-disdainful of its self-defence,
    Even more disdain the sullying of self?
    Ay, but she knows it! Joseph! Why can man
    But kill and nevermore the dead awaken?
    He should be able both to do or neither.
    He takes his vengeance too! He comes not! Yet
    I see him there! “My Lord commanded?” Monstrous!
    I’ll not believe ’t! Salome, keep you silent
    Howe’er it came it came not so! Perchance
    The eating secret like embowelled fire
    Forced way through him; or he perchance betrayed it
    Because he deemed me as one lost, and now
    Was fain to be atoned with Alexandra
    Before the tidings came. Well, we shall see!
    For she must stand the proof. Had I but guessed
    That she could come by knowledge of it, never
    Had I so far been gone. Now that she knows,
    From her revenge I now will need to fear
    The thing that from her soul’s unstableness
    Perchance I feared unjustly. I must fear
    That on my grave she’ll make my wedding-mirth.
    Soemus came at nick of time. He is
    A man who, if I were not in the world,
    Had stood where I now stand. How true he thinks,
    How zealously he serves, he proves by coming.
    I give him now the charge. I know from him
    She lures naught out of lock if she essay
    The man in him to tempt. If he betray me
    She pays me such a price as--Then, Salome,
    Then you were in the right!--Now to probation!

                                                                [_Exit._




ACT IV


SCENE 1

_The Castle on Zion._ MARIAMNE’S _Apartments_. MARIAMNE. ALEXANDRA.

ALEX.

    You pose me with your riddles. First the oath
    “I kill myself if he return no more!”
    Then bitter coldness when he came, so froward
    That he was mortified as keen as I
    Rejoiced; and now again the deepest mourning!
    I’d gladly see the man who comprehends you.

MAR.

    If ’tis so hard, why do you plague yourself?

ALEX.

    And then the tart repugnance in the manner
    With which you fend Soemus to his distance!
    His looks betray there’s something on his heart----

MAR.

    You think so?

ALEX.

                  Ay, and he would make avowal
    But dare not venture it; he would perhaps,
    If he should see you leap into the Jordan,
    Be dubious if he were privileged
    To rescue you from death; and he were right,
    For this blunt gracelessness is past all bounds.

MAR.

    You’ll own at least that Herod cannot say
    I probed the virtue of his friend, and lured
    His secret, if he has one, out of him
    With cozening-tongued duplicity. No, no;
    It lies on the knees of God if I should learn it;
    And my heart says I take no risk therein.[13]

                           [_Enter_ SAMEAS, _with fetters on his hands_.


SCENE 2

THE SAME. SAMEAS.

SAMEAS.

    The Lord is great!

MAR.

                          He is.

ALEX.

                                You free, and yet
    In fetters? Yet one riddle more!

SAMEAS.

                            These fetters
    I lay not by again. Jerusalem
    Shall day by day have brought to its remembrance
    That Jonah’s progeny in prison sat.

ALEX.

    How came you out, then? Did you bribe the gaolers?

SAMEAS.

    What, I? the gaolers?

ALEX.

                           True, with what I know not.
    You still have on your shirt of camel’s hair,
    And that they freed you for a wild bees’ nest
    Which you, with every hollow tree familiar,
    Could have betrayed to them for ransom-price--
    That I misdoubt, for there’s enough of honey.

SAMEAS.

    Why, what a question! ’Twas Soemus’ self
    That oped the gates for me.

MAR.

                          How could he dare that?

SAMEAS.

    How then? And was’t not you that gave him orders?

MAR.

    I?

SAMEAS.

      No? And yet I thought ’twas what he said.
    I may have erred, for I was just then saying
    The last psalm backwards-way when he came in
    And slackly gave him only half my ear.
    Well, good! It seems the Lord has done’t, and I
    Must go unto the Temple there to thank Him,
    For I have naught to do in David’s castle.

MAR.

    The Lord!

SAMEAS.

          The Lord. Was I endungeoned justly?

MAR.

    The times are now no more in which the Lord
    Spoke with the naked word unto His People.
    We have instead the Law; that speaks for Him.
    Extinguished is the Pillar of Fire and Cloud
    Through which our Fathers in the Wilderness
    Were shown the paths he led them, and the Prophets
    Are dumb as He.

ALEX.

             Nay, not yet wholly so!
    Only a short time since there was a fire
    Foretold by one--a fire that came to pass.

MAR.

    Granted; but ’twas himself at mid of night
    Applied the kindling flame.

SAMEAS.

                       Woman, blaspheme not!

MAR.

    And I blaspheme not! No, I say what happened.
    The man’s a Pharisee like you yourself.
    He speaks like you, he raves like you. The fire
    Was meant to prove to us that he was truly
    A prophet, and could see into the future.
    But still a soldier caught him in the act.

SAMEAS.

    A Roman?

MAR.

                 Yes.

SAMEAS.

                    He lied! He was perhaps
    Suborned. He was suborned thereto by Herod,
    Suborned by you yourself.

MAR.

                         Sirrah, your place!

SAMEAS.

    You are his wife, you are the wife o’ the miscreant
    Who overweens him into the Messiah.
    If you can lock him in your arms and kiss him
    You can do other things for him as well.

ALEX.

    He overweens him now into Messiah?

SAMEAS.

    He does! He flung the words into my teeth
    When to the dungeon he had ordered me.
    I shrieked to God. I cried--“Look on thy folk
    And send Messiah unto us, whom Thou
    Hast promised for the time of direst need!
    The direst need’s upon us!” Then replied he
    With a proud curl o’ the lip--“He’s long since here;
    But ye--ye know it not! ’Tis I myself!”

ALEX.

    Now, Mariamne?

SAMEAS.

                  Then, with godless wit
    He proved that we’re a Folk of scatter-brains
    And he alone has got an uncracked pate.
    We did not dwell for naught on the Dead Sea
    That is devoid of motion--ebb and flood--
    And therefore poisons all the world with pest.
    It was a trusty mirror of ourselves!
    And he was bent to pang us into living
    Were he compelled e’en Moses’ numskull book--
    So unabashed his words--with force to tatter.
    It was for that sole cause our river Jordan,
    Whose clear wave laughed and leapt throughout our land,
    Symbolled us not instead of a dull bog.

ALEX.

    He flung the mask so wholly from him?

SAMEAS.

                                        Ay!
    And yet perchance he deemed me, when he did it,
    As good as dead by then, for straight thereon
    He gave the word of death.

MAR.

                         He had been goaded.
    He found revolt for greeting.

SAMEAS.

                         Now I warn you
    What is your duty. Be renounced from him
    As he has now renounced his God. Thereby
    You can chastise him, for he loves you dear.
    My only notion, when Soemus freed me,
    Was that you’d done it. If you do it not
    Chide not the shaft that from the welkin falls
    As undeserved when it strikes you with him.
    I go to sacrifice.

ALEX.

                Take then the victims
    From out my stall.

SAMEAS.

              I take them where they’re missed,
    The widow-woman’s lamb, the poor man’s sheep.
    What is your ox to God?

                                                [_Exit._ _Enter_ SOEMUS.


SCENE 3

MARIAMNE. ALEXANDRA. SOEMUS.

SOEMUS.

                    Pardon!

MAR.

                               Indeed,
    I wished even now to have you called. Come in!

SOEMUS.

    ’Tis the first time you had such wish.

MAR.

                                             Ay, true!

SOEMUS.

    You’ve parried me till now.

MAR.

                                  And have you then
    Sought for me? Have you aught to seek from me?
    I cannot think it so.

SOEMUS.

                 At least the former;
    Behold in me the truest of your servants.

MAR.

    I did, but do so now no more.

SOEMUS.

                              No more?

MAR.

    How could you let that rebel, him whom Herod
    Ordered to prison, have his dungeon opened?
    Is he still King, or is he King no more?

SOEMUS.

    The answer’s not so easy as you think.

MAR.

    And if you find it hard you’ll pay it dearly.

SOEMUS.

    You’ve not yet heard the news the fight is lost?

MAR.

    The fight at Actium’s reported lost?

SOEMUS.

    Yes. Antony is fallen by his own hand,
    With like death Cleopatra.

MAR.

                           What, could she
    Have such fine nerve? Time was she could not bear
    A sword to sight, and shuddered back at his
    Whene’er he held it toward her for a mirror.

SOEMUS.

    Titus the Captain had these very tidings.
    Octavian curses that no means were used
    To hinder them. Myself I read the letter.

MAR.

    Then Death for some long time has had his share
    And every head stands firmer than it stood
    Ere then.

SOEMUS.

      You think so?

MAR.

                       Why that riddling smile?

SOEMUS.

    You do not know Octavian, it would seem.
    He will not ask Death if his maw be queasy;
    He’ll find the friends of Antony of use
    To serve him yet another meal, and one
    Where tasty tit-bits will not be so scarce.

MAR.

    That touches Herod?

SOEMUS.

                     Well, if he should hold
    To what he purposed----

MAR.

                      What was that?

SOEMUS.

                                 He said:--
    “I have no further love for Antony,
    Far sooner do I hate him; but I will
    Stand at his side unto the latest hour
    Although I fear that he is doomed to fall.
    I owe it to myself if not to him.”

MAR.

    Right kingly spoke!

SOEMUS.

                   Ay, true, right kingly spoke!
    Only Octavian’s not the man t’admire it,
    And Herod if he do so----

MAR.

                         Who dares doubt it?

SOEMUS.

    Then he’s a lost man too, or black affront
    Has smirched Octavian’s name when rumour said
    The mighty slaughter following Caesar’s death
    Was written on his reckoning.

MAR.

                            That you’re fast
    In faith on such an outcome, and that Herod
    Is ranked by you with death, is clear enough,
    Else had you never dared what you have dared.
    Ay, and the shudder takes me, I confess it,
    At your calm certainty. You are no fool
    And without ground would never dare so much.
    But, howsoe’er it be, this thing is true--
    I’m still alive, and I, yes I, shall show you
    That I am skilled to render him obedience
    Even in his death; there’s not a sole command
    That he has given shall not be executed.
    Such be the Dead Man’s sacrifice.

SOEMUS.

                              Not one?
    I doubt it, Queen! (_Aside._) Now let the blow come down!

MAR.

    As true as I am Maccabee you send
    This Sameas again into his dungeon.

SOEMUS.

    If such your will demand, ’tis done; and if
    You will yet more, if he shall die the death
    The King had threatened, speak and he is dead.
    But now vouchsafe a question of your grace--
    Shall I take you, that thus the sacrifice
    You think to yield be full and blemishless,
    Shall I take you and pierce you with a sword-thrust?
    For such injunction too I have from him.

MAR.

    Woe!

ALEX.

       Nevermore!

MAR.

                  And so the end is come!
    And what an end! One that its own beginning
    Engulfs with all beside. The time that’s past,
    The time to come, dissolve to naught in me.
    Naught I have had and naught I have and naught
    I shall have. Oh, was mortal e’er so poor?

ALEX.

    Whatever misdeed hatched and wrought by Herod
    You told me, every several one I’d credit,
    But this----

MAR.

             Misdoubt it not, ’tis fixed and sure.

ALEX.

    You say’t yourself?

MAR.

                        O God, I know wherefore!

ALEX.

    Then must you know the deed before you!

MAR.

                                             Ay!

                                   [_She thrusts the dagger at herself._

ALEX. (_preventing her_).

    Mad fool! Is this his due? Is it his due?
    That you should play the butcher on yourself?

MAR.

    A topsy-turvy freak! My thanks! This office
    He’d chosen for himself. (_Throws the dagger away._) Tempter, begone!

ALEX.

    You’ll seek a refuge under Rome’s protection!

MAR.

    On none who has a thing at heart to do
    I’ll put the hindrance. I myself, I give
    A feast to-night.

ALEX.

                A feast?

MAR.

                          And there I dance----[14]
    Yes, yes, that is the way!

ALEX.

                        To gain what end?

MAR.

    Hey, servants!

                                          [_Enter_ MOSES _and_ SERVANTS.

                    Fling the splendid state-rooms wide
    And summon all that can be jubilant!
    Put fire to every candle that will burn,
    Pluck all the flowers from stem that are not faded!
    There is no need that any now survive.
    (_To_ MOSES.) You tricked our wedding once in famous trappings,
    Your task to-day’s a feast more brilliant still.
    Spare nothing therefore. (_Advancing._) Herod, tremble now
    Though never yet before in life you trembled!

SOEMUS (_approaching her_).

    I feel your smart as you do.

MAR.

                                 Keep your pity,
    I’ll rob you not! You axe no butcher’s boor,
    I dare not doubt it, you have given me proof!
    But that has turned you traitor, and to traitors
    I give no thanks nor bear them round my person
    Whatever use they may be in this world.
    For that’s not judged awry. Were you the man
    You seemed to be, it had been forced on God
    To work a wonder; He were forced to lend
    The very air the tongue it lacks for utterance.
    That He foresaw or ere your clay He shaped
    And made the first of hypocrites--made you!

SOEMUS.

    That thing I am not! I was Herod’s friend,
    His weapon-brother and his shoulder-fellow,
    Before he scaled the throne! I was his servant,
    His truest servant, since he’s been a king,
    But only so as long as he could hold
    The Man in me inviolate and the Human,
    As I in him the Hero and the Lord.
    He did so till, the eyes of the dissembler
    For the first time unworthily down-drooping,
    He gave the word of Blood through which he doomed,
    All-heartless, me and you to certain death,
    Through which he doomed me to your folk’s revenge,
    To Roman rage, and to his own slant spite,
    And you to be the prey of my sword’s point.
    That was my proof how high he rated me.

MAR.

    Did you not tell him how your heart recoiled?

SOEMUS.

    I did it not because I would protect you.[15]
    I took his charge in show and hypocrited,
    If you will have the word, that thus no other
    Take it instead from him and stab me down.
    A Galilean had the deed accomplished.

MAR.

    I own me wrong. You stand with him as I;
    You have, as I, in your most Holy Place
    Felt hurt; as I, am slighted to a Thing,
    For what he is as spouse he is as friend.[16]
    Come to my feast.

                                                                [_Exit._

ALEX.

    So you, it seems, were waiting for your time
    As I was!

SOEMUS.

     For my time? How mean you that?

ALEX.

    I’ve often seen it with a wondering eye
    How, when the King gives thanks for his high office
    Unto the Roman’s whim (the heady swiller!)
    And not to lineage and pride of birth,
    You bent your back as though you seemed, like him,
    Forgetful that you were his equal peer.
    But now I pierce your mask; it was your wish
    To lull him from suspicion!

SOEMUS.

                        There you err.
    I spoke the truth in all. His equal peer
    I do not deem myself nor ever shall.
    How many a paltry wight there is I know
    Who, just because his blood’s no kin of his,
    Yields muttering homage; others too, I know,
    Keep troth alone for Mariamne’s sake.
    But I am never bonded with that brood
    That rather to a baby’s sword is loyal,
    If it be birthright, than a hero’s sword
    That is not wrought till smithied out of fire.
    I ever saw the higher soul in him,
    And when the weapon-brother dropped his shield
    I raised it for him with as ready will
    As e’er I raised his sceptre for the King.
    The crown and the first woman: both I yielded
    With grudgeless heart, for I had felt his worth.

ALEX.

    But you too are a man!

SOEMUS.

                           That I am not
    Forgetful of such truth I prove you now.
    There’s none so great that I’m a working-tool
    Fit to his use. Who calls on me for service
    That rendered or not rendered, come what may,
    Makes me to sure and shameful death devote,
    That man annuls my every bond, to him
    My duty is to show that ’twixt the King
    And slave there is an intermediate stage
    And that the Man takes stand on this.

ALEX.

                                  To me
    ’Tis one what ground you had. Enough; you’ve come
    To join my faction.

SOEMUS.

                Fear no battle more,
    He is as good as dead. Octavian
    Is scarce an Antony who lets the flesh
    Be hacked from body and forgives the deed
    Because he can admire the hand that does it.
    _He_ only sees the strokes.

ALEX.

                           And what says Titus?

SOEMUS.

    He thinks as I do. I had Sameas
    Set free alone because it is my wish
    To answer my account. Indeed I had
    No other way to audience with the Queen.
    Now knows she what she needs must know, and now
    When the death-tidings come is strong to meet them.
    That was my aim. A noble heart! and kill her?
    Her very tears would rouse the soul of pity!

ALEX.

    Ay, true! And what a tender husband! Seek her,
    Persuade her only that she give herself
    To Rome for shelter, and attend the feast
    Which is the signal that she breaks with Herod
    Be he now dead or living.

SOEMUS (_following her_).

                            He is dead!

                                                              [_Exeunt._


SCENE 4

_The Castle on Zion. A Hall._

MOSES, ARTAXERXES, JEHU, _and other_ SERVANTS _preparing a feast_.

_Afterwards_ SOEMUS, SILO, JUDAS.

MOSES.

    Come, Artaxerxes! Still with wits a-rambling?
    Look sharp, look sharp! You play no clock with us.

ART.

    Had you done that for livelong years, as I,
    You’d be in just the case that touches me,
    More so if every night you got to dreaming
    You had the old-time post still in your care.
    I make machine-like grasp with my right hand
    Toward my left hand’s pulse-tick, counting, counting,
    And counting off to sixty ere the thought
    Comes over me I am a clock no more.

MOSES.

    Then once for ever--mark ye that with us
    You’re not to take the time. We have for that
    The sand and the sun-dial. For yourself,
    You’ll take the time like all of us--for action.
    Sheer lazy-lumpishness!

ART.

                       Nay, let me swear it!

MOSES.

    Peace, peace! You’ve never counted at your meals.
    What’s more, oath-swearing’s not the mode with us,
    And (_aside_) if the King had not been half a heathen
    We’d not be blessed with this outlandish slave.
    Why, here the music-makers come! Look sharp!

                                              [_Goes out to the others._

JEHU.

    Say, is it really true, this tale of you
    They tell?

ART.

          Why what’s to stop it being true?
    And must I then a hundred times aver it?
    At the great satrap’s court I was a clock,
    Well-off at that, much better than with you.
    At nights I had a spell, then ’twas my brother,
    And in the day too when I went to eat.
    And I must say I do not thank your King
    That with the other prisoners of war
    He dragged me here. True, toward the end my post
    Was somewhat hard. They marched me to the field
    And what with arrows right and left a-flying
    And men a-falling, you will botch your count
    More easily of course than in a hall
    Where folks are come together for the dancing.
    I screwed my eyes up tight, for I’m no hero
    Such as my father was. He found an arrow
    Standing at post--he was a clock like us,
    Me and my brother, every one a-clocking--
    Even then he called the hour and died. What say ye?
    That was a man! A trifle over-kind
    That trick of Fate to drive at him the arrow!

JEHU.

    And have you then no sand among your people
    That you must do this?

ART.

                      We? Have _we_ no sand?
    Enough to blot and bury all Judaea!
    It’s just because the satrap there with us
    Will have things better done than others do them.
    Why, know you not a man’s pulse tallies truer,
    If he be sound and have no fevered blood,
    Than ever sand of yours runs through its pipes?
    And have your dials any jot of use
    If it should please the sun to stop his shining?
    (_Counts_). One! Two!

MOSES (_coming back_).

                         Off! Off! The guests are coming now!

ART.

    So that’s the feast? Why _there_ I saw feasts, look ye,
    Where never fruit went past the lips if not
    Brought from some foreign part; where penalty,
    Oft the death-penalty, was fixed if ever
    A single water-drop were drunk; where people
    All trussed with hempen cerements and with pitch
    Beplastered, in the garden-parks at nights
    Were burnt for torches----

MOSES.

                        Peace! What evil then
    Had those poor fellows on the satrap done?

ART.

    Done? Naught at all! With us a funeral
    Is far more gorgeous than a wedding here.

MOSES.

    And I suppose you gobble up your dead?
    It pairs well with the rest o’ the tale!

ART.

                                       But then
    Is it not true as well that once your Queen
    Melted a pearl to nothing in her wine,
    That was more costly than the King’s whole realm,
    And that she gave this wine unto a beggar
    Who gulleted it down like common stuff?

MOSES.

    It is not true, thank God!

ART. (_to_ JEHU).

                              Well--but you said it!

JEHU.

    Because I felt it was a brave thing for her,
    And such is told of the Egyptian Woman.

MOSES.

    Be off with you!

ART. (_pointing to the roses which_ JEHU _carries_).

                     Real roses! Why they’re cheap.
    Among our folk we’ve silvern ones and golden.
    These should be sent to other lands where flowers
    Are costly--rare as gold and silver here.

                           [_The servants scatter. The guests, among
                           them_ SOEMUS, _have been assembling during
                           the latter half of this scene. Music and
                           dancing._ SILO _and_ JUDAS _detach themselves
                           from the others and advance to the
                           foreground_.

SILO.

    What does this mean?

JUDAS.

                        You ask what does this mean?
    The King is coming back, and that to-day.

SILO.

    You think so?

JUDAS.

                 Can you ask? Could there well be
    Another ground than this for such a feast?
    Go, practise some new-fangled bob o’ the back!

SILO.

    Yet it was said that----

JUDAS.

                            Sham and Flam, as ever,
    If it were said some evil overtook him,
    But quite in order, since there’s many a one
    That wishes him this evil. Do men dance
    In houses where there’s wailing for the dead?

SILO.

    Then soon there’ll be a deal of blood set pouring--
    The dungeons since the outbreak are cram full.

JUDAS.

    I know that better than you e’er could know’t;
    I’ve dragged them in; full many a one, myself.
    For ’twas so crass, this outbreak, so wrong-headed,
    That every man who did not bend his thoughts
    To hang himself was bound to stem its current.
    You know I have no heartfelt love for Herod
    However low I set my back a-bobbing--
    But he has right in this--the Romans are
    Too mighty for our strength, we are no more
    Than a mere insect in the lion’s gullet.
    It cannot sting him, for it’s gulped and gone.

SILO.

    I’m only sorry for my gardener’s son
    Who threw a stone against the Roman Eagle
    And had the ill success to hit his mark.

JUDAS.

    How old is he?

SILO.

                   Let’s see! How long is it
    From when I broke my foot? He was born then.
    I know it since his mother could not nurse me.
    Yes, that’s right! Twenty!

JUDAS.

                        Then he suffers naught.

                                     [MARIAMNE _and_ ALEXANDRA _appear_.

    The Queen!

                                                      [_Is about to go._

SILO.

        What do you mean by that? A word more!

JUDAS.

    Good; but between ourselves! Because he’s twenty
    He suffers naught. But if he were nineteen
    Or one-and-twenty ’twould befall him ill.
    Next year the case is altered.

SILO.

                             Cease your jest!

JUDAS.

    I tell you it is thus, and if you’ll know
    The why, because the King’s self has a son
    Of twenty years, and yet he knows him not.
    The mother took the child when he forsook her
    By stealth away and swore a solemn oath
    She would corrupt it----

SILO.

                       Oh, the hideous woman!
    A heathen!

JUDAS.

        Likely so; but I know not--
    Corrupt it so that he’d be forced to kill it.
    But to my mind it was a frenzy-freak
    That spumed away with the first foaming rage;
    But still it pricks his peace, and no death-sentence
    Has ever been fulfilled on any person
    Whose years have tallied with his own son’s age.
    Comfort your gardener, but--between ourselves!

                                     [_They disappear among the others._


SCENE 5

MARIAMNE, ALEXANDRA, _who appear in the foreground_.

ALEX.

    And so you’ll not take refuge with the Romans?

MAR.

    With what intent?

ALEX.

                     Why, to have life in safety.

MAR.

    Life? Surely so. One must have that in safety,
    For Pain would have no sting if robbed of that.

ALEX.

    Then give at least the hour its meed of right.
    You give a feast; then show to all your friends
    A face all festal-fair as is but meet.

MAR.

    I am no pipe to play on and no candle,
    Not made for sounding and not made for lighting.
    Then take me as I am. No, do it not!
    Drive me to have my own neck’s cleaver whetted--
    What idle words! Drive me to share your joyance.
    Soemus, come!

                              [SALOME _enters and advances towards her_.


SCENE 6

THE SAME. SALOME. _Afterwards_, SOEMUS.

MARIAMNE (_to_ SALOME).

                 Salome, you? Be welcome
    Above all others, ’spite your mourning-garments.
    This I could scarce have hoped.

SALOME.

                                   Indeed I must
    If I will learn how matters stand. I have been
    Invited to a feast, and yet they say
    No word of why the feast is being given.
    True, I can guess it, but I must have knowledge.
    Herod returns, of course, and we shall see him
    This very day. The candles answer “yes,”
    The music’s merry din; do you too say it!
    I ask not for my own sake, but you know--
    Nay, nay, you know it not, you have forgotten,
    Perhaps you’ve had a dream that she is buried,
    Else had you not concealed from her the news.
    Ah but your dream was tricksy, for she sits
    Ever in the old corner where she sat
    When once she blessed you----

MAR.

                             What is this you say?

SALOME.

    Enough, enough! Herod still has a mother
    Who trembles for her son and pines away.
    And I, I beg you, let her criminal misdeed
    In bearing me prolong no more its penance;
    Give the relief for which her old heart yearns.

MAR.

    To mother of his I cannot give relief.

SALOME.

    Are you not then to-day expecting Herod?

MAR.

    Him least of all. I heard that he is dead.

SALOME.

    And celebrate this feast?

MAR.

                                 Since I’m still living!
    And should not one be glad that one still lives?

SALOME.

    I’ll not believe you!

MAR.

                             For this doubt much thanks!

SALOME.

    The candles----

MAR.

                       Do they not stand there for light?

SALOME.

    The cymbals----

MAR.

                       Are for ringing--what end else?

SALOME (_pointing to_ MARIAMNE’S _rich attire_).

    The precious stones----

MAR.

                       Of course would suit you better.

SALOME.

    All this would indicate----

MAR.

                                   A joyous feast.

SALOME.

    And one that on a grave----

MAR.

                                  ’Tis possible.

SALOME.

    Then, Mariamne, hear my earnest word!
    I ever hated you, but there was left me
    A clinging doubt if I were right therein
    And oft with rue in heart I’ve come anear you
    To----

MAR.

      Give me kisses! Once indeed you did it!

SALOME.

    But now I see that you are----

MAR.

                                      Bad enough
    To let you stand while I depart to join
    With yonder throng that now begins the dance.
    Soemus!

                        [SOEMUS _advances and gives_ MARIAMNE _his arm_.

SOEMUS.

            Queen!

MAR.

                  ’Twas just in this attire,
    Ay just, that Herod saw me when he gave
    The bloody order to you. Wonderful!
    It all has happened, yes, in just this fashion.
    (_As she leaves, to_ SALOME.) But you’ll look on?

                                [_Is led by_ SOEMUS _to the background,
                                where both are now no longer seen_.

SALOME.

               This woman’s still more wicked
    Than I had ever thought, and that says much!
    Therefore she has the gay-hued serpent-skin
    With which she lures each victim--yes, she dances!
    Then now at least I have a peaceful conscience;
    On her no soul on earth could work a wrong.

                 [_She watches_ MARIAMNE. _Enter_ ALEXANDRA _and_ TITUS.


SCENE 7

SALOME. ALEXANDRA. TITUS.

    _Afterwards_, MARIAMNE.

ALEX.

    Titus, you notice how my daughter’s mourning.

TITUS.

    ’Twould seem she has some new despatch from Herod.

ALEX.

    Despatch that all is over with him, yes!

TITUS (_watching_ MARIAMNE).

    She dances!

ALEX.

                  Less like widow than like bride!
    Titus, until to-day she’s worn a mask,
    And mark you this, not she alone has done’t.

TITUS.

    Well for her! She’ll not change from what she is,
    For if she ranks her with the foes of Herod
    She will not share the pangs his friends must suffer.

ALEX.

    And to prove that she gives, you see, this feast.

                                               [_Moves away from_ TITUS.

TITUS.

    Oh what a shudder takes me at these women!
    One, plotting at a hero, whom she first
    With hoodwink-kisses lulled to lying peace,
    Hews off his head in sleep; the other dances,
    Merely to keep firm hands upon the crown,
    Like one possessed upon her husband’s grave.
    And sure I was invited this to see.

                                            [_Watches_ MARIAMNE _again_.

    Yes, yes, I see’t. In Rome she’ll have my witness!
    But here I drink no single drop of wine.

SALOME.

    What say you, Titus? Stands it with the King
    In such ill plight that she may now dare all?

TITUS.

    If he’s not straightway given Octavian
    His turncoat loyalty and helped to deal
    The home-thrust ere his fall at Antony,
    And that I must misdoubt, it stands not well.

SALOME.

    Oh, if he had but done it! If her head
    Be kept to her, I know not why the Lord
    Gave o’er the blood of hot-eyed Jezebel
    For dogs to lick.

                                        [_She is lost among the others._

TITUS.

                    She dances still, and yet
    Seems forced in mien and mood. She should be glowing
    And yet is blanched as though, enchained in musing,
    She did some other thing, and sleepy-willed
    Followed the dancing. Then it seems this Judith
    Brought not her work unanguished to the full.
    Ay, and the last kiss given by her husband,
    She here and now disowns with pompous show,
    Must leave upon her lips the cling of feeling.
    She’s not yet even seen him dead--She comes!

         [MARIAMNE _appears again_. ALEXANDRA _and_ SOEMUS _follow her_.

ALEX. (_to_ MARIAMNE).

    I spoke with Titus.

              [MARIAMNE _suddenly turns and sees her image in a mirror_.

MAR.

                         Ha!

ALEX.

                            What ails you, then?

MAR.

    ’Twas thus I saw myself but late in dream--
    This was the cause, then, why I could not rest me
    Till that lost ruby came again to light
    That now casts from my breast such dusky glimmer--
    The image had been flaw-marred lacking it!
    On this the last treads hot----

ALEX.

                              Come to yourself!

MAR.

    Nay, let me be! A mirror just like this,
    At first with glazy muffle, as o’erbreathed
    By living lips; then, like the pictures which
    It showed in linked procession, softly clearing
    And lastly luminant as polished steel.
    I saw my life in sum. First I appeared
    As child in light of roses tender-ambient
    Of ever redder, ever darker hue.
    But then the features, though my own, were strange
    And only in the third-changed scene I knew
    Myself in such an all too youthful face.
    And now there came the Virgin and the moment
    When Herod took me to the flowery garden,
    Bearing me company, and flattering spoke:--
    “There’s none so fair she would not need to pluck
    The lily of your hand.” Ha, be he cursed
    That he forgot so full, so full! And then
    It all grew eerie, and against my will
    I saw the future, saw me thus and thus
    And lastly as I stand here. (_To_ ALEXANDRA.) Is it then
    Not passing strange if dreams step into life?
    Again the gleaming mirror overmisted,
    The light grew ashen-coloured and myself,
    So shortly since a blooming creature, blanched
    As though beneath the splendour of this garb
    My every vein had long been stilly bleeding.
    A shudder gripped me, and I cried “I come now
    As skull and bones and that I will not see!”
    And then I turned away--

                                      [_She turns away from the mirror._

VOICES IN THE BACKGROUND.

                           The King!

                                                        [_General stir._

ALEX.

                                     Who? who?


SCENE 8

THE SAME. HEROD, _in war accoutrement_. JOAB, _and Retinue_.

MARIAMNE.

    ’Tis Death, Death, Death, has come amongst us,
    Without announcement, as he ever comes!

SALOME.

    Ay, Death for you in truth! You feel’t yourself?
    My brother!

                      [_Offers to embrace_ HEROD; _he thrusts her back_.

HEROD.

        Mariamne!

MAR. (_repulsing him with a violent gesture_).

                  Draw the sword!
    Give me the poison-goblet! You are Death,
    Death gives embrace and kiss with sword and poison!

HEROD (_turning round to_ SALOME).

    And what means this? A thousand candles called
    From distant regions through the night to me--
    “Your courier did not fall in Arab hands
    A captive. He arrived; you are awaited!”
    And now----

SALOME.

        The candles lyingly deceived you,
    The jubilation here was for your death!
    Your courier arrived not, and your mother
    Has rent her raiment over you.

          [HEROD _looks round about_; _sees_ TITUS _and beckons to him_.

TITUS (_advancing_).

                                   It is so.
    No single soul here could have thought, myself
    The least of all, that you before the fight
    At Actium would turn from Antony
    And, as I grant, at prudence’ call give Caesar
    Transferred allegiance. But that you have done it
    Is proved by your returning here. Then good.
    My--gratulations.

MAR. (_approaching him_).

                    And my deep regrets
    That no occasion offered you the chance
    To slay Mark Antony with your own hand.
    ’Twas this way you would show your new Lord best
    You had no further dealings with the old one.
    You would have brought your own friend’s head to him,
    He would have recompensed you with the crown.

HEROD.

    Pooh, Titus, pooh! Even you think thus of me?
    I made my southward march to Araby
    Pursuing orders Antony had given.
    But there I found no foe, so I made ready
    To start for Actium, and there’s no blame
    Attaints me if I came too late. Had he
    Maintained the attitude I thought he would,
    In such a case (_to_ MARIAMNE) occasion had been sought
    To make him present of Octavian’s head
    As payment for the crown. (_To_ TITUS.) He did it not.
    He was long dead ere I appeared, nor was there
    A further need for friend, and I set out
    To see Octavian, not indeed as King--
    I laid the crown aside--but all the more
    For that, no beggar. Drawing sword I spoke:--
    “This I’d have used against you, and perchance
    I would have dyed it with your very blood
    If things here had gone better. That is o’er.
    I sink it at your feet and lay it by.
    Weigh then in mind the sort of friend I was
    And not whose friend. The Dead has set me free
    And now, if so you will, I can be yours.”

TITUS.

    And he?

HEROD.

    He said:--“Where have you placed your crown?
    I’ll set another noble stone therein.
    Receive the province which till now has lacked you,
    This only shall my largess make you feel,
    That I am victor, not Mark Antony.
    From Cleopatra it had ne’er been taken,
    What she till now possessed I give to you.”

TITUS.

    That--I had ne’er conceived, nor praise I aught
    Except your star.

HEROD.

                    O Titus, praise it not!
    I have been spared for a harsh work. Soemus!

             [SOEMUS _remains standing where he is and does not answer_.

    What, recreant? You are dumb! I know enough.
    Oh oh, away with him!

SOEMUS (_as he is led off_).

                          Naught I deny,
    But that I deemed you dead--you may believe it.
    And now I do your will.

                                                                [_Exit._

HEROD.

                    And after death
    The end of all, eh, friend? Yes, yes, my Titus,
    Had you but known the man as I, you never
    Would stand there so composed, so unperturbed
    As I stand here; you would be foaming, gnashing,
    And raving. (_To_ MARIAMNE.) Woman, what were you about
    To lure so good a man so far? Salome,
    So you were right! I must be washing, washing--
    Blood here! I institute an inquisition!
    You’re silent? Case you still in haughty challenge?
    And I know why. You have not yet forgotten
    What once you were to me. I’d rip more lightly
    E’en now heart out of breast--Titus, it is so--
    Than (_again to_ MARIAMNE) you from out my heart. And yet I do it.

MAR. (_turning round abruptly_).

    I am your prisoner?

HEROD.

                     Yes.

MAR. (_to the soldiers_).

                        Then lead me hence.

                               [_Turns round._ _At a signal from_ HEROD,
                               JOAB _follows her with soldiers_.

    Death cannot be my husband any more.

                                                                [_Exit._

HEROD.

    Ha ha! To her in time past I had spoken:--
    “Two souls that love each other as they should love
    Could never bear each other to outlive.
    If I on some far battlefield had fallen
    You would not need a courier’s announcing,
    You’d feel that on the instant death had happened
    And woundless die in sentience of mine.”
    Titus, bemock me not. ’Tis so, ’tis so,
    But, ah the pity, mankind loves not thus.

                                                               [_Exit._




ACT V


SCENE 1

_Castle on Zion. A large Audience-Chamber, as in Act I. Throne and
tribunal._

HEROD. SALOME.

HEROD.

    An end, an end to this! The Inquisition
    I’ve ordered and will execute its sentence.
    I, I whom once each fever set a-shaking
    E’en though her maid-in-waiting it befel,
    ’Tis I myself that weapons death against her.
    Be that enough! and if your zeal not yet
    Allow you rest, it will o’ershoot its target.
    I shall be thinking that ’tis hate alone
    Speaks from your mouth, and you will meet as witness
    Rejection, though I shall admit as such
    Each several candle that has cast its flame,
    Each several flower that has shed its scent.

SALOME.

    Herod, I’ll not deny the truth. I have
    Ere now spied on her faults and painted them
    With heightened hue as you enhanced the virtues
    That you discovered in her. Was the pride
    Flaunted upon your mother and me whenever
    She crossed our path, was this a ground for love?
    As being of a loftier race she bore her
    That never had awaked another thought
    Within my mind than this--“Wherefore exists
    The bulky book that tells the hero-deeds
    The Maccabeans wrought unto our folk?
    She bears the chronicle upon her face.”

HEROD.

    Your will is to refute me, and you seal
    The sentence I have passed.

SALOME.

                       Nay, hear me out!
    ’Twas so, I’ll not deny it. But if now
    I’ve said more than I know and think and feel,
    Yea, if I am not moved by sister’s pity
    To lock the half of what I could have told you
    Even now within my breast, then may my child--
    You’ll grant I love it well--as many years
    Live out as hairs are counted on his skull
    And every day as much of sorrow bring him
    As it shall have of minutes, yea, of seconds.

HEROD.

    A fearsome oath!

SALOME.

                    And yet it falls from me
    More lightly than this word--“The night is black.”
    E’en though the eye were jaundiced, ’tis past credence
    That jaundiced eye were paired by jaundiced ear,
    Yea, and by instinct, heart, and every manner
    Of organ that is buttress to the senses.
    And this time all are tuned so fine together
    That they could never clash in contradiction,
    Yea, and had God upon that festal night
    Called unto me from out the heights of Heaven,
    “Say from what evil I shall give your earth
    Deliverance--you have the choice!” I would not
    Have named the pest, nay, but your wicked wife.
    I shuddered at her; she would taint my mood
    As though I’d reached a demon out of Hell
    Amid the pitchy black by human hand
    And he had met me with derision, stepping
    Before me in his proper shape of fright
    From out the stolen frame of flesh and blood
    And grinned and mowed at me through twisting flames.
    Nor did I shudder thus alone. The Roman,
    Yea, even the ironside Titus felt recoil.

HEROD.

    True, true, and he weighs heavier than yourself,
    For just as he loves no one, he hates no one,
    And just he is like ghosts devoid of blood.
    Now leave me, for I am awaiting him.

SALOME.

    I vow this dance shall never be forgotten
    In which, responsive to the music’s beat,
    She trod the floor as though she knew for sure
    That you lay underneath. By God, I would
    I were not forced to say it, for I know
    How inly you, who gave her mother, sister,
    And what not for her victims, must rebel.
    And yet it was so.

                                                                [_Exit._


SCENE 2

HEROD _alone_.

HEROD.

               Titus said to me
    The very same. Myself I saw enough,
    And she is right. I gave to her a sister,
    A mother almost, for her victims. Would they
    Not counterpoise the brother whom she lost?
    In her eyes they do not.

                                                         [_Enter_ TITUS.


SCENE 3

HEROD. TITUS.

HEROD.

                  Well, Titus, well?
    Admits Soemus----?

TITUS.

               What you know. Not more.

HEROD.

    Naught of----?

TITUS.

                   Oh no! He leapt to feet as raving
    If I but cast the lightest hint thereat.

HEROD.

    I could expect it.

TITUS.

                      “Never could,” he answered,
    “A wife like yours have lived, and never was
    A man so little worth the precious jewel
    That God vouchsafed to him----”

HEROD.

                             As I myself!
    Yes, yes! “He did not know the worth of pearls
    Wherefore I took them from him,” said the thief.
    I know not if that helped.

TITUS.

                       “Her heart was nobler
    Than gold.”

HEROD.

        And so he knows it! Swimming-brained
    He lauds the wine. Does not that furnish proof
    That he has drunk.[17] And what veneer used he
    To coat it? Why betrayed he my commission
    To her?

TITUS.

           From loathing, as he said.

HEROD.

                                From loathing?
    And he ne’er gave the loathing words to me?

TITUS.

    Would not the event have been his bane? Could you
    Have granted life unto the stockish servant
    If once he had received from you command
    And pushed it from him?

HEROD.

                     Why, in such a case,
    Was’t not enough to leave it unfruitioned?

TITUS.

    Yes; but if he went further he has done it
    Perchance because he deemed you as one lost
    And now was fain to have the Queen’s good grace
    A bargain at your cost for his own profit,
    Since it was in her hands his future lay.

HEROD.

    No, Titus, no! Soemus was the man
    To risk the daring bid in his own person
    That makes another’s grace a needless prop.
    For that sole cause I gave it him. I thought:--
    “’Tis done for self if ’tis not done for you.”
    Yes, had he been a lesser than he is
    And had he not in Rome friends in such plenty
    I could have thought it true. But now--no, no,
    There was one only ground.

TITUS.

                       And yet he’ll not
    Confess that one.

HEROD.

               He were not what he is
    If he should do it, for he knows full well
    What follows that, and hopes now through his lying
    To waken in my breast one last misdoubting
    Such as will guard, if not perchance his head,
    Then hers before the coming bulk of death.
    He errs, though. That misdoubting lacks its sting.
    Had I no cause to punish what she did
    I’d punish that which she became and is.
    Ha, had she ever been what she has seemed
    She never could have donned this shifting slough
    And I’ll take vengeance on the duplex Thing.
    Yes, Titus, yes, I swear it by the key
    Of Paradise that she holds in her hands,
    By all beatitude that she erewhile
    Has granted me, that she can grant me still,
    Yea, by this instant’s shudder which monitions
    That I in her will blot myself to nothing,
    I make an end howe’er the matter stand.

TITUS.

    It is too late to make the cry of warning
    “Give not the order!” and I know myself
    No means of leading this to issue clear
    And therefore cannot dare to say “Hold! Hold!”

                                                          [_Enter_ JOAB.


SCENE 4

THE SAME. JOAB.

HEROD (_to_ JOAB).

    Are they assembled?

JOAB.

                        Long since. From the prison
    I must announce to you what seems of weight.
    We cannot bring this Sameas to such lengths
    That he’ll disbody soul.

HEROD.

                            I gave command
    He should be put to torture till he do it.
    (_To_ TITUS.) This man had sworn, I’ve heard, that he would kill him
    Could he not make me in his own sweet likeness,
    Which process is to break what he has named
    The heathenish notions in me. Since he’s failed
    I now use force on him his oath to keep,
    His death’s a right good thousandfold deserved.

TITUS.

    I had myself been urgent for his death,
    For me he has reviled and Rome in me
    And that can everywhere be granted pardon
    But here among this stubborn-stomached folk.

HEROD (_to_ JOAB).

    Well then?

JOAB.

                Your words were followed to the letter,
    But it has helped to no success. The headsman
    Plied him with almost every pang, and more,
    Grimmed into spite by such unwincing front,
    Which he misread as scorn, he dealt him wounds.
    But ’tis as though he’d given a tree a flogging,
    As though ’twere nerveless wood that took his slashing.
    There stands the old man dead to feel of pain,
    He sings, instead of shrieking out, and clutching
    To get the knife that’s held before his eyes,
    He sings the psalm which the Three Men of yore
    Sang in the fiery oven, and he lifts
    At every added pang his voice the louder,
    And when he bates it prophesies forsooth!

HEROD (_aside_).

    Such is their breed. Yes--will they e’er be other?

JOAB.

    Then he cries out as though for things of wonder
    Beyond the threshold he had got an eye
    For every wound that he can count. “Now is
    The time fulfilled and in the manger-crib
    The Virgin-Mother of the stem of David
    E’en at this hallowed moment lays a Child
    Destined to topple thrones, awake the dead,
    Tear stars from heaven and from eternity
    Unto eternity o’erlord the world.”
    Meanwhile the folk in thousands are assembled,
    Hang on the very doors and hear it all,
    Believing that Elijah’s flaming chariot
    Will sink to earth and bear him like the prophet
    On skyward path. The headsman’s menial even
    Shrank back and did not cut him with new wounds,
    But held the old together.

HEROD.

                         Then he shall
    Be killed upon the spot and to the folk
    Be shown when he is dead. Thereafter bid
    The Judges to present them and----

JOAB.

                                 The Queen!

                                                                [_Exit._

HEROD.

    You, Titus, shall be seated at my side.
    I send her mother too an invitation
    That she at least fail not her child as witness.

                            [_Enter_ AARON, _and the other_ FIVE JUDGES.
                            ALEXANDRA _and_ SALOME _follow_. JOAB
                            _appears immediately after_.


SCENE 5

THE SAME. AARON. THE FIVE JUDGES. ALEXANDRA. SALOME. _Afterwards_,
MARIAMNE.

ALEX.

    My King and Lord, I give you lowly greeting.

HEROD.

    My thanks to you.

                                [_He seats himself on the throne._ TITUS
                                _places himself at his side. Then_ THE
                                JUDGES _seat themselves at a signal in a
                                semicircle round the tribunal_.

ALEX. (_while this is being done_).

                      The fate of Mariamne
    I sunder from my own, and save myself,
    Like to a torch, to break in future blaze.

                                             [_She sits next to_ SALOME.

HEROD (_to_ THE JUDGES).

    You know why I have had you summoned here.

AARON.

    In deepest pain do we appear before you.

HEROD.

    I do not doubt it. With my house and me
    You’re closely bonded all as friend and kin;
    What hurts me must hurt you. You will rejoice,
    Touching the Queen, if you--(_stops short_) forgive me that!
    You will rejoice if you should not condemn her,
    If you may send her, cleared before her spouse,
    Again unto my house, not Golgotha,
    Yet will you not, faced with the uttermost,
    Quake marrowless at its necessity.
    Since luck and evil luck with me you share
    You share my shame and honour alike with me.
    Then to your duty!

                       [_He gives_ JOAB _a sign_. JOAB _goes out and
                       appears again with_ MARIAMNE. _A long pause._

HEROD.

              Aaron!

AARON.

                     Queen, we have
    A heavy task. You stand before your judges.

MAR.

    Before my judges, yes. Before you too.

AARON.

    Do you repudiate this court?

MAR.

                                   I see
    A higher here. If that allow your questions
    The answering word from me, then I shall speak,
    And hold my peace if such the same forbid.
    I scarcely see you clear, for there behind you
    Stand ghosts that gaze augustly, dumb, and earnest;
    They are the great Forefathers of my stem.
    Three nights I saw them ere this hour in dream,
    Now too they come by day to me, and well
    I know what it must mean when thus assembled
    The Dead already ope for me their ranks
    And when what lives and breathes for me is pale.
    See there behind yon throne on which a king
    In seeming sits, stands Judas Maccabaeus--
    Hero of Heroes, look thou not so darkly
    Upon me from on high! Thou shalt be glad of me!

ALEX.

    Curb your defiance, Mariamne!

MAR.

                                   Mother!
    Farewell! (_To_ AARON.) Say wherefore I am here accused.

AARON.

    The accusation’s this--your King and Lord
    You have deceived. (_To_ HEROD.) ’Tis so?

MAR.

                            Deceived? Ah, folly!
    Did he not find me in the way he thought
    That he would find me, at the dance and play?
    And did I don, when I had heard the death-news,
    My mourning-raiment? Did I shed my tears?
    And did I tear dishevelled locks? Then had I
    Deceived him; but these things I have not done,
    And can bring solid proof. Salome, speak!

HEROD.

    I found her as she says. She does not need
    To look about for other witnesses.
    But I had never, never had such thought.

MAR.

    Ne’er had such thought? Yet feigned and had the headsman
    Set close upon my back? That cannot be.
    As I at parting stood before his spirit
    E’en so at our reunion he has found me.
    Therefore I must deny that I deceived.

HEROD (_breaking into wild laughter_).

    Nay, she has not deceived because there’s naught
    She did but what foreshadowing Sentience,
    All praise to her, dusked warning Deity,
    Caused me to feel. (_To_ MARIAMNE.) Woman, this fits you well!
    But build not overfast on this, that I
    With peace and happiness have lost my strength;
    Perchance some jot has still survived for vengeance
    And--e’en as boy I ever sent a bird
    A chasing dart if it outflew my range.

MAR.

    Speak not of sentience foreshadowing, speak
    Of fear alone. You trembled at the thing
    That you deserved. It is the way of man.
    You can no longer trust the sister, since you
    Have done to death the brother; all that’s grossest
    Your sullying mind imputes and thinks that I
    Must give response, yea, and out-Herod you.
    Speak truth, or did you always, when you marched
    In honourable open war to death,
    Set headsmen close behind my back?  You’re silent.
    Good then! Since you’re so deeply sensitive
    On what in me is seemly; since your fear
    Schoolmasters me on duty, then will I
    Now at long last fulfil this holy duty.
    Therefore I sunder me from you for aye.

HEROD.

    Answer! Do you confess or not confess?

                                                  [MARIAMNE _is silent_.

    (_To the_ JUDGES.) You see that all confession fails. Also
    I’ve not the proofs as such that you will need.
    But on a murderer once I saw you pass
    The doom of death because the slain man’s jewel
    Was found on him. It was no help that he
    Had pointed to his cleanly-washen hands,
    And none too that he swore the dead man gave it
    As gift. You had the sentence executed.
    Good then! It stands thus here. She has the jewel
    That proves to me more undeniably
    Than ever any tongue of man could do it
    She shamed me with the abhorred of all abhorred.
    A miracle must not alone have happened.
    It must in other case have been repeated,
    And miracles were ne’er repeated yet.[18]

                                            [MARIAMNE _makes a gesture_.

    ’Tis true she’ll speak just as the murderer spoke--
    “’Twas given her for a gift!” And she may dare it
    Because a chamber, like a wood, is dumb.
    But were you tempted thus to give her credit
    Then I will set in scale my inmost feeling
    And probing of each possibility
    As counterbalance, and demand her death,--
    Her death, I say! no more this nauseous goblet
    I’ll empty which her proud defiance fills,
    Nor day on day be gadflied with the riddle
    If such a pride’s the most repellent face
    Of Innocence, or the most brazen mask
    Of Sin. I’ll rescue me from out this whirlpool
    Boiling with hate and love ere I be choked,
    And be the cost as high as e’er it may.
    Therefore away with her! You dally still?
    It’s settled! What? I missed the telling point?
    Then speak! I know that silence is my part,
    But speak! speak! Sit not there like Solomon
    Between the mothers with the pair of children.
    Her case is clear; you need no more for sentence
    Than what you see! A woman that stands there
    As she does, earns her death though she were clean
    Of every guilt. And still you never speak?
    Will you perchance first have the proof how fast
    Is my conviction that she has deceived?
    Such I will give you through Soemus’ head
    And that at once.

                                                  [_He goes up to_ JOAB.

TITUS (_rising_).

                     I say this is not trial.
    Your pardon!

                                                      [_Is about to go._

MAR.

                Roman, stay! I recognise it,
    Who can repudiate it if not I?

                        [TITUS _seats himself again_. ALEXANDRA _rises_.

MAR. (_approaching her, and in a subdued voice_).

    You’ve wrought on me much harm and never has
    Your meed of happiness by mine been measured.
    If I’m to pardon that, be silent now.
    You alter naught; my will is firm and fixed.

                                       [ALEXANDRA _seats herself again_.

    And now, my Judges?

AARON (_to the other_ JUDGES).

                       Let that man rise up
    Who deems the sentence of the King unjust!

                                                   [_All remain seated._

    You therefore all resolve yourselves for death?
    (_Rising._) Queen, you are here condemned to suffer death.
    Have you aught still to answer?

MAR.

                               If the headsman
    Is not bespoke already and by now
    Awaits me with his axe, then I would crave
    A final word with Titus ere my death.
    (_To_ HEROD.) It is not wont to give the last request
    Of dying men refusal. Can you grant it,
    Then let my life be added unto yours.

HEROD.

    The Headsman is not yet bespoke. I can.
    And since you promise me eternity
    As my reward, I must, and more, I will.
    (_To_ TITUS.) This woman is an awesome thing!

TITUS.

                                          She stands
    Before a man as never woman should;
    Make then an end.

SALOME (_advancing_).

                     Oh do it! For your mother
    Is sick unto the death. She will be whole
    If spared to see it.

HEROD (_to_ ALEXANDRA).

                        Did you not say aught?

ALEX.

    No.

               [HEROD _gazes long at_ MARIAMNE. MARIAMNE _remains dumb_.

HEROD.

      Die! (_To_ JOAB.) I lay it in your hands.

                              [_Goes off quickly._ SALOME _follows him_.

ALEX. (_looking after_ HEROD).

                                               I have
    An arrow still for you. (_To_ MARIAMNE.) You wished it so!

MAR.

    I thank you.

                                                      [_Exit_ ALEXANDRA.

AARON (_to the other_ JUDGES).

                  Can we not even now attempt
    To soften him? This fills me o’er with horror.
    She is the last of Maccabean daughters.
    If we could only gain the briefest respite!
    Now ’twere not feasible that we withstood him.
    Soon will he be his former self again
    And then it’s possible he’ll punish us
    Because to-day we made him no resistance.
    Follow him!

                                                                [_Exit._

JOAB (_approaching_ MARIAMNE).

                You forgive? I must obey.

MAR.

    Do what your Lord commands and do it swift.
    I shall be ready soon as you yourself,
    And queens, you know, are never wont to wait.

                                                           [_Exit_ JOAB.


SCENE 6

MARIAMNE. TITUS. _Afterwards_, JOAB.

MARIAMNE. (_approaching_ TITUS).

    Yet one more word before I sleep, the while
    My latest chamberlain prepares my bed.
    I see you are astounded that this word
    Directs itself on you and not my mother,
    But she is far and foreign to my heart.

TITUS.

    Astounded that the woman thus should teach me
    How hearted I, the man, should meet my death.
    Yes, Queen, it prickles sense, this thing you’ve done,
    Nor less, I hide it not, your Being’s self;
    Yet, this despite, the hero-soul I honour
    Which lets you take your leave of life as though
    You left this fair world at your journey’s end
    No longer worth a fleeting backward glance.
    And this brave mood half reconciles me to you.

MAR.

    ’Tis no brave mood.

TITUS.

                   I’ faith I have been told
    Your black-look Pharisees give out the notion
    That death is but the proper birth of life.
    And who believes them sets the world at nothing
    In which the sun alone gives light eternal
    And all beside is puffed into the night.

MAR.

    I ne’er would hear them and believe it not.
    Nay, nay, I know from what I am to part.

TITUS.

    Then you stand thus as scarce could Caesar’s self
    When Brutus’ hand had dealt the dagger-thrust.
    For he, too proud to bare his pain of heart
    And yet not strong enough to choke it under,
    In falling covered up his countenance.
    But you can hold it back within your breast.

MAR.

    No more, no more! It is not as you think.
    I feel no longer pain of heart, for pain
    Demands the nerve of life, and life in me
    Is a quenched fire. I long have been no more
    Than middle thing between the Man and Shadow
    And scarcely grasp the thought I still can die.
    Hear now a thing I will confide in you,
    But first give oath to me as man and Roman
    That you’ll be dumb till I am under earth,
    And that you bear me escort when I go.
    You hesitate? I ask too much of you?
    My slip to sin is not the cause, and if
    You later speak or if you hold your peace
    Decide yourself; I’ll bind you not in aught,
    And more, I hold that wish of mine in check
    Since you have ever, like a bronzen god
    Above a brawl of fire, self-mastered, cold,
    Cast the strong fretless eye upon our hell.
    You may command belief in giving witness.
    We are for you a race of other breed
    No bond can knit to you; you speak of us
    As we would speak of foreign plants and stones,
    Impartial, void of love and void of hate.

TITUS.

    You go too far.

MAR.

                     If you refuse me now
    Your overstubborn word, I take my secret
    With me into the grave; my latest solace
    I then must lack this--that one human breast
    Will keep mine image pure and undefiled,
    Which then when Fate has dared its ugliest
    Can lift the veil that shrouds it from the feel
    Of duty and of reverence for the truth.

TITUS.

    Good. I will swear the oath to you.

MAR.

                                         Then know
    I put deceit on Herod, but ’twas other,
    Far other than he weens; nay, I was true
    As he to self. Why shame me thus--much truer,
    For he has long been other than he was.
    What, am I to protest it? Sooner far
    I were resolved to swear an oath I have
    My eyes and hands and feet. Them I would lose
    And I would still remain that which I am;
    But not my heart and soul.

TITUS.

                       I do believe you
    And I will----

MAR.

              Keep the promise you have made.
    I doubt it not. Now ask yourself my feeling
    When for the second time (for once already
    I’d pardoned him) he put me under sword
    And I must say to me:--“Your shadow’s liker
    Your proper self than that wry twisted image
    He bears of you far in his inmost depths.”
    ’Twas that I would not bear, and could I so?
    I made to grasp my dagger, and prevented
    From rash-essayed self-murder, I then swore--
    “It is your will in death to be my headsman?
    You shall become my headsman, but in life.
    The woman you have gazed on you shall slaughter
    And not till death shall see me as I am;”
    You came unto my feast; well then, a mask
    Was dancing there.

TITUS.

               Ha!

MAR.

                     ’Twas a mask that stood
    To-day before the Judges; for a mask
    The axe is whetted, but it strikes myself.

TITUS.

    I stand dumbfounded, Queen, and yet I charge you
    With no injustice when perforce I say
    That you had duped my very self, had filled me
    With horror and recoil before your feast
    As now with shudders and admiring wonder.
    If thus with me, how could this show for him
    Have failed to dim your Being in a darkness,
    For him, whose heart all passion-fluctuous
    As little as a turbid-troubled stream
    Could image things reflected as they are.
    Therefore I give his hurt my answering feel
    And find that your revenge is overstern.

MAR.

    But that revenge I take at my own cost;
    And proof it was not for the sake of life
    That death like any altar-beast incensed me
    I give you, for I cast that life away.

TITUS.

    Give me my word again!

MAR.

                             And if you broke it
    You’d alter not a tittle; for to die,
    There man commands his fellow, but to live,
    In that the mightiest forces not the weakest.
    And I’m aweary! Yea, I envy now
    The stone, and if the end of life is this
    That man should learn to hate it and to death,
    Eternal death, give preference, it is
    Achieved in me. And may they quarry granite,
    Uncrumbling rock, to hollow out my coffin,
    May it be sunken in abysmal ocean
    That so my dust escape the elements
    Oblivioned for all eternity.

TITUS.

    And yet we all live in the world of show.

MAR.

    I see that now and therefore I go out.

TITUS.

    I have myself against you testified.

MAR.

    To gain that end I had you at the feast.

TITUS.

    Should I say to him what to me you’ve said--

MAR.

    Then he would call me back, I doubt it not.
    And if I followed, this were my reward,
    That now before each one that comes anear me
    Henceforward I must shudder and inly say--
    “Take care, for this perchance is your third headsman!”
    No, Titus, no, I played no pettish game;
    For me there’s no return; if such there were
    Think you I had not found it out when I
    Took everlasting farewell from my children?
    Naught but defiance drove me, as he thinks;
    If so my guiltless smart had broke defiance
    And now ’twould only mean a bitterer death.

TITUS.

    Oh, if he felt that, came himself and flung him
    Down at your feet!

MAR.

                  Yes, then indeed he had
    The Demon overmastered, and I could
    Say all to him. For it is not my part
    To chaffer with him meanly for a life
    That through the price alone at which ’tis bought
    Must lose for me the paltriest patch of worth.
    It were my part, to crown him for self-conquest
    And, oh believe, I could!

TITUS.

                      Have you no boding,
    O Herod?

             [JOAB _enters noiselessly and remains standing in silence_.

MAR.

    No! You see, he sends me--him! (_pointing to_ JOAB.)

TITUS.

    Let me----

MAR.

                 Have you not understood me, Titus?
    And in your eyes is still the cause defiance
    That put my mouth in lock? Can I still live?
    Can I still live with him, the man who now
    In me God’s image venerates no more?
    And if by keeping silence I had power
    To necromance old Death and give him weapons
    Were it my duty then to break my silence
    Only to change one dagger for the other?
    And were it more to do so?

TITUS.

                        She is right.

MAR. (_to_ JOAB).

    Are you prepared?

                                                           [JOAB _bows_.

    (_Turning towards_ HEROD’S _apartments_.) Then, Herod, fare you well!
    (_To Earth._) Thou, Aristobulus, oh receive my greeting!
    Soon I am with thee in eternal night.

                         [_She moves towards the door._ JOAB _opens it.
                             Armed men are seen who form their ranks in
                             homage. She goes out._ TITUS _follows her_.
                             JOAB _joins them. Solemn pause._


SCENE 7

SALOME _alone_.

SALOME.

    She’s gone! And yet I feel no throb of heart,
    A further sign that she deserves her fate.
    And so I have at last my brother back,
    My mother also has her son. ’Tis well;
    I would not budge from him. Else had the Judges
    E’en then his judgment jarred. Nay, Aaron, nay,
    No word of prison! She’d remain endungeoned
    Not for a moon. The grave alone holds fast,
    For to the grave alone he has no key.[19]

                                                     [_Enter_ A SERVANT.


SCENE 8

SALOME, THE THREE KINGS FROM THE EAST, HEROD, TITUS, JOAB, ALEXANDRA.

SERVANT.

    Three kings from out the Eastern lands are here,
    They are with costly presents richly laden
    And at this very moment have arrived.
    Never were seen more strangely striking figures
    Nor garments of more wondrous kind than these.

SALOME.

    Conduct them in.

                                                       [_Exit_ SERVANT.

                      I’ll tell him this at once.
    So long as they’re with him he will not think
    On her; and all is over soon with her.

                                                [_She goes after_ HEROD.

                       [_The_ SERVANT _conducts in the_ THREE KINGS
                       FROM THE EAST. _They are dressed in strange
                       and curious raiment in such a way that
                       they differ from each other in every particular.
                       A rich retinue follows them, of like
                       characteristics. Gold, incense, and myrrh.
                       Enter_ HEROD, _and_ SALOME
                       _shortly after him_.

FIRST KING.

    O King, all hail!

SECOND KING.

                     A blessing on thy House!

THIRD KING.

    A benison to all eternity!

HEROD.

    I thank you. But methinks for such an hour
    The salutation’s strange.

FIRST KING.

                 Was not a son
    Born to you?

HEROD.

          Me? Oh no! My wife has died.

FIRST KING.

    We have no call to tarry here.

SECOND KING.

                                  So there’s
    A second King then here?

HEROD.

                      Then there would be
    None here at all.

THIRD KING.

         There’s here, beside your own,
    A second stem, it seems, of Kingly blood.

HEROD.

    And why?

FIRST KING.

        It is so.

SECOND KING.

                 Yes, it must be so.

HEROD.

    Of that too I know naught.

SALOME (_to_ HEROD).

                             In Bethlehem
    The stem of David still has left a shoot
    Remaining.

THIRD KING.

    David was a King?

HEROD.

                           ’Tis so.

FIRST KING.

    Let us now go even unto Bethlehem!

SALOME (_continuing, to_ HEROD).

    But now it plants its seed alone in beggars.

HEROD.

    I think it, else----

SALOME.

                        I spoke once with a virgin
    Of David’s house, Mary, I think, her name.
    I found her fair enough for such a lineage,
    But she was to a carpenter betrothed
    And scarcely lifted eyes upon my face
    When I made question of her name.

HEROD.

                               You hear it?

SECOND KING.

    ’Tis naught! We go.

HEROD.

                    You will then, ere you go,
    Acquaint me what has brought you hither.

FIRST KING.

                                Reverence
    Before the King above all Kings.

SECOND KING.

                      The wish
    Ere yet we die to view his countenance.

THIRD KING.

    The holy duty at His feet in homage
    To lay whatever on earth is costly-rare.

HEROD.

    Who gave you tidings of Him then?

FIRST KING.

                                 His star!
    We journeyed not together and we knew
    Naught of each other, for our kingdoms lie
    To furthest East and furthest West, seas flow
    Between them, lofty mountains sunder them----

SECOND KING.

    And yet it was the self-same star we saw,
    The self-same impulse that had seized our hearts;
    We wandered on the self-same way and met us
    At last together at the self-same goal----

THIRD KING.

    Whether a King’s son or a beggar’s son
    The Child this star has lighted into life
    Will be uplifted high, and on the Earth
    No man shall breathe that will not bow to Him.

HEROD (_aside_).

    So speaks the Ancient Book as well! (_Aloud._) May I
    Make offer of a guide to Bethlehem?

FIRST KING (_pointing to Heaven_).

    We have a guide!

HEROD.

                   Then good. And if the Child
    Be found, I prithee send to me the tidings
    That I with you may do Him reverence.

FIRST KING.

    It shall be done. Now forth to Bethlehem!

                [_The_ THREE KINGS _with their retinue leave the stage_.

HEROD.

    It never will be done!

                     [_Enter_ JOAB _and_ TITUS, _followed by_ ALEXANDRA.

                          Ha!

JOAB.

                              It is finished!

                                            [HEROD _covers up his face_.

TITUS.

    She died, yes, died! But as for me, I have
    A still more fearful office to perform
    Than he who brought your word of blood to pass,
    For I must tell you she was innocent.

HEROD.

    No, Titus, no!

                                             [TITUS _is about to speak_.

    (_Stepping close up to him._) For were that so, you could not
    Have let her go to death.

TITUS.

                       No one was able
    To hinder that but you. It gives me pain
    To be against my will your worse than headsman,
    But if a holy duty yields the dead one,
    Whoever he may be, the rite of burial,
    Still holier is the duty from a shame
    To wash him clean if he deserve it not.
    This duty now lays law on me alone.

HEROD.

    I see from all you say one only thing--
    Her spell in death itself was true to her.
    Why eats Soemus still my heart? How could he
    Resist this blinding woman in her life?
    Even in the dying flash she kindled you.

TITUS.

    Goes jealousy the very grave beyond?

HEROD.

    If I have duped me, if from out your mouth
    Some other thing than pity now were speaking
    Too deep by far not to be more than such,
    Then I must give you warning that your witness
    Helped to condemn her, that the duty-bond
    For you had then been this--to give me warning
    As soon as e’er the tiniest doubt had come.

TITUS.

    But my word held me back, and, more than that,
    The unimplorable Necessity.
    Had I relaxed from her one pace, no further,
    Upon herself the deathly thrust were given.
    I saw the dagger hidden in her breast
    And more than once the twitching of her hand.

                                                              [_Pause._

    She wished to die; she must have done so, too.
    As much she suffered and as much she pardoned
    As she had power to pardon and to suffer.
    I have beheld her very innermost,
    Who more demands should quarrel not with her,
    Should quarrel only with the elements
    Which, willed or not, had been so mixed in her
    That she could go no further. Yes, but let him
    Show me a woman further gone than she!

                                               [HEROD _makes a gesture_.

    She wished to have her death from you, and called
    The unshapen dream-child of your jealousy
    Into illusive being at her feast,
    Juggling her soul to death and all deceiving.
    I found that stern but not unjust. She stepped
    As mask before your eyes; the mask was destined
    To sting you till you pierced it with a sword-thrust.

                                                   [_He points to_ JOAB.

    And that you did and killed her very self.

HEROD.

    So spoke she, but she spoke from vengeance so.

TITUS.

    So was it. I have testified against her.
    How gladly would I doubt it!

HEROD.

                          And Soemus?

TITUS.

    Upon the way that leads to death I met him,
    He entered on his own as soon as hers
    Had been accomplished, and he felt it balm
    To think his blood with hers should be commingled
    E’en though upon the block by headsman-hand.

HEROD.

    Aha! You see?

TITUS.

                  And what? Perchance in stillness
    He burned for her. But if that were a sin
    Then it was his and never aught of hers.
    He cried to me:--“I die because I spoke;
    Else had I died because I might have spoken.
    For such was Joseph’s lot. He swore while still
    In death that he was innocent as I,
    I marked it.”

HEROD (_breaking out_).

                 Joseph! Is he too avenged?
    Does Earth gape open? Do the striding dead
    Outface me all?

ALEX. (_approaching him_).

                   They do! But no, fear nothing.
    There’s one--a woman--still lies under earth!

HEROD.

    Accursèd! (_Commanding himself._) Be it so. If then Soemus
    Committed but a single crime against me,

                                                  [_He turns to_ SALOME.

    Joseph, through whom this vulgar-souled suspicion
    Had filled him, Joseph fooled him even in death--
    Is it not so?--Why are you silent now?

SALOME.

    Hot-foot he dogged her every step----

ALEX. (_to_ HEROD).

                                         Ay true!
    But with intent to find the ripened time,
    No more, in which to carry out your charge
    Both her and me to murder----

HEROD.

                                  Is this true?
    (_To_ SALOME.) And you, you?

ALEX.

                           Almost the self-same hour
    Why he allowed his mask fully to fall
    Had Mariamne ta’en on her the oath
    To give herself, if you returned not hither,
    A sacrifice to death. I hide it not.
    For doing so I hated her.

HEROD.

                       Oh fearful!
    And this--but now you tell this?

ALEX.

                               Yes!

TITUS.

                                   I know
    This too. It was her latest word to me.
    But for a thousand years I had been silent,
    I would but clear her name, not give you torture.

HEROD.

    Then---- (_His voice fails him._)

TITUS.

              Calm yourself! It wounds me too.

HEROD.

                                              Ay, wounds
    You, her (_to_ SALOME) and everyone who here, like me,
    Has been the blinded tool of slant-souled Fate,
    But I alone have lost what on this earth
    Eternally will ne’er be seen again.
    Have lost! Oh! Oh!

ALEX.

                 Aha, Aristobulus,
    You are avenged, my son, and I in you.

HEROD.

    What, triumphing? You think that I will now
    Wilt like a broken thing? Nay, I will not.
    I am a king and I will let the world

           [_He makes a gesture as though snapping something to pieces._

    Feel it and tremble! Up now, Pharisees.
    Up with your rebel heads! (_To_ SALOME.) And you, why shrink you
    So soon from me? Why, sure, I’ve not yet altered
    My face, but on the morrow it may happen
    That my own mother shall be forced to swear
    I am no more her son.

                                  [_After a pause, in a toneless voice._

                           Ah, if my crown
    Were set with all the stars that flame in heaven,
    For Mariamne I would give them hence
    And, if I had it too, this earthen ball.
    Yea, were it possible that I myself
    Living as now within the grave could lay me
    And ransom her from out her own, I’d do it!
    With my own hands I’d dig myself therein.
    Ah, but I cannot! Therefore have I still
    And fastly hold what still I have. That is
    Not much, but still a crown is part thereof
    Which now shall fill for me the woman’s place,
    And who makes grasp for that--One does so now;
    Why yes, a Boy does so, a Marvellous Boy--
    He Whom the Prophets have long been announcing
    And Whom e’en now a star lights into life.
    But, Fate, thy reckoning is sore at fault
    If thou, in trampling me with iron foot,
    A piecemeal thing, hast thought to smooth His course.
    A soldier I; myself will fight with thee
    And, as I lie, will bite thee in the heel.
    (_Sharply._) Joab!

                                                     [JOAB _approaches_.

    (_In a contained voice._) You go at once to Bethlehem
    And tell the Captain there who’s in command
    To find the Marvellous Boy--Nay, he will not
    Ransack him out, not all can see the star;
    As for those Kings, they’re sly as sanctimonious--
    The children who within the bygone year
    Were born, he is to slay upon the spot.
    He leaves no single one surviving.

JOAB (_retreating_).

                                      Good!
    (_Aside._) And I know why! But Moses was delivered
    Pharaoh despite!

HEROD (_still loud and strong_).

                   I’ll see to it to-morrow,
    To-day with Mariamne--(_He collapses._) Titus!

                                                   [TITUS _catches him_.


APPENDIX

_containing passages from the original version and those omitted for
stage representation._


1. _At this point was written originally:_--

     I’ve no more use for him; behind the plough
     To trapse is ’gainst his stomach; as to music,
     For that he’s over-restive; then the trumpet,
     I tried some blowing-lessons--wasted all!
     Fists, ay and fine ones too, are his equipment,
     Fear he knows none, not e’en the fear of me.
     And since the day you scoured the mountains clean
     There’s never brigand gives himself to glimpse.
     So he’s with us a lack-use, and perchance
     Will be the first to get a kink in his ways
     And spoil our maiden’s pleasure in the woods.
     If you’ll not--(_To his son._) Now then, Blacklooks, clear your brow!
     The word was not ill-meant; and if the King
     Forgives the jest, why you can do it too!
     So then you’ll take him, Sire? Before the gate
     I saw the Roman cohort in your service
     And thought this raw-hide lad was just their fellow,
     In all, I mean, that touches form and fashion,
     As though, within the very mother-womb,
     He’d had the thought to stop a gap therein.
     No single one I saw gave me the notion
     He might have had a bent or finger-knack
     For sandal-cobbling or for garment-stitching,
     But in each mother’s son I thought I marked
     That straight upon the Captain’s uttered word
     He’d spit his very sire without a qualm,
     --Just what this sprig of mine were ripe to do!
     The worser else, for soldiering the better.

2. _Insert:_--

    If this lad be not true to me, why then
    His mother was no better toward his father.
    At least he’ll be so for an eight-days’ space
    For he knows none here. That’s a point worth while!

                                                           [_Exit_ JOAB.

3. _In the MS.:_--

    Of pearls we spoke our latest word. But pearls
    Are white and blood is red. How came I then
    From white of pearls upon the red of blood?
    ’Tis naught; the wearing’s sweet, nor long the question
    Whether the diver, even to arm and leg,
    Paid a forced reckoning to the snatching polyp.
    For if his fate be such to go a-seeking
    And fight therefore the Things o’ the underwaters,
    ’Tis mine to have them for the necklet-winding
    And make myself a mark for every arrow
    Winged by wry hearts and hate--worse lot than his!
    Who has a head believes him worth a crown,
    Who has a neck wants pearls as well thereon.

4. _After this line in the MS.:_--

    Believe my word, natures there are in life
    That put deceit, and must, on all whose trusting
    Is not a wholeheart thing. Not in the testing,
    Nay, through the testing’s self they topple groundward
    Being too high therefor, too fine of feel.
    Woe then to you if you’ve no heart for trusting,
    Since you--Forgive me! This is the last time.

HEROD.

    Farewell.

MARIAMNE.

          Farewell. I know you will come back.

5. _Insert:_--

HEROD (_aside_).

    I’ll do it--ay and must, though doubly sore
    It sting me that no more is in my power.

6. _Insert:_--

    Ay, and for us as well ’twill serve a turn,
    Henceforth through all Judaea ’twill be ours
    To fare at night-time and without our torches.
    You see the King knows well what he’s about.

7. _The text runs:_--

    _Es wär’ genug den Cäsar zu bezahlen_
    _Und schätzt er selbst sich ab vorm Tode._

The words seem to mean “The tribute would be enough to pay Caesar if
he (Herod) were assessing his own value to save himself from death.”
The passage proved too much for me, and I owe this explanation to Mr.
Nicholson. I translate:--

    It were enough to quit his debt to Caesar
    Were he himself to rate his worth ’gainst death.

8. _Insert:_--

    Herod, if it were mine with one mere word
    To pluck me from my death, never would I
    Seek such abjection as that word to utter;
    If I were strong to tell me that my life,
    My whole-of-blemish life itself had spoken,
    Then would I rather die than let misthought
    Of meaner mould by such a word be stifled.
    Forget not that!

9. _Insert:_--

    That you deny. Now ere the time I know,
    If death be overhasty on my footsteps,
    What thing will make me quail in my last hour.
    I saw, now years agone, a dying man
    Upon a field of fight, on whom an insect
    Had crept and stung. One twitch he still could give
    And straight thereon yielded the final breath.
    I felt its horror. For his wounds, I scarce
    Set eyes upon them, but the insect-sting
    I see even now. And thus ’twill go with me.
    That sense-repelling, spirit-sickening thing
    Is my last torture. Take my prepaid thanks!

10. _Insert:_--

    If it have weight for me, ’twill lie for me
    Self-manifest.

11. _Insert:_--

    To-night a feast! I’ll shape me to the image
    That he must bear in heart, deeming it me!
    He sees me ever dancing, that is clear,
    E’en when I’m weeping and dissolved in anguish.
    Dance then I shall!--set on the cymbal’s clashing
    That at my sight he be not put to blush!

12. _Instead of this speech of_ SOEMUS _the MS. has_:--

    Then stood I not before you. Then on me
    Had fallen his death-hand, as, when he returns,
    That death-hand will and must soon as it may.
    That lay and lies i’ the order. Even as I
    Was but his limb, I had alone ’twixt death
    And life the simple choice. My bow was forced
    And forced the hypocriting--have your word.
    Albeit my inmost soul before him froze.

13. _Insert:_--

SOEMUS.

    He hoodwinked me not for a moment’s space.
    And all the less for this, that Joseph’s death
    To me was less a riddle than to all
    Who saw him not upon his latest path.
    ’Twill shock you to recoil--but there was like
    Injunction laid on him, and he kept dumb
    Lest aught should slip his guard. Thus much at least
    I must believe, for in the very dying
    He swore he’d naught committed worthy death.

MAR.

    I know it all--yes!

SOEMUS.

                     What?

ALEX.

                             And gave’t your pardon?

SOEMUS.

    And, that despite, extolled him and defended?
    Then the mere harboured thought upon your hurt
    Was a more heinous thing than the wrought deed
    On any woman else!

MAR.

                  Come to my feast! _etc._

14. _Insert:_--

TITUS.

         If so be your physician
    Gave him assurance that from Africa
    You brought a fever, then (so ran his words)
    He’d pardon your misthought, but else----

HEROD.

                                      So speaks he
    Knowing full well the aftermath, and fain
    To be her shield before my vengeance. That
    I understand. And what veneer, _etc._

_The original version ran thus:_--

TITUS.

                        If so be your physician----

HEROD.

    What were his grounds?

TITUS.

                          The thing you hug so close.

HEROD.

    And how was that?

TITUS.

                      He gave me half-light hints.
    “You laid on him an outrage passing nature
    In whose compare to set into a blaze
    The Temple even, were none.”

HEROD.

                       And, not content
    To leave it undischarged, whereby enough
    Were expiated the most ticklesome
    Of consciences to mollify, he went
    Flying to her with my command, and made
    His bid--no guess you know it--

TITUS.

                            Naught!

HEROD.

                                     He kept
    Concealed from you what he laid bare to her?
    Oh had he changed his rôle about! Nay, never!
    He must have given to you what stood for him
    Within her payment. Learn it then from me--
    I laid on him--ask me not why--command
    Whereby he was to kill her if myself
    Should have no home-return. That thus I did
    Proves you how deep I trusted him. Believe me
    I had good ground therefor, and if the iron,
    Whereof the man is mettled, flagged and flowed,
    It proves but this, that he was in the fire.

TITUS.

    Yes, yes, and yet--’tis not what I’d have done.

HEROD.

    Had she but loved me as I her, then were she
    After my death all out of love with life.
    What the heart’s out of love with lets a man
    Begone, nor rues it. No one holds it fast.
    What was the point to ponder? Had she not
    Tripped me behind my back, she’d gladly die;
    Whereas if she did trip me, then were hers
    A well-earned death for such a double front.
    Then let the friend of twilight blame my step,
    The light’s my choice, and now I see full clear,
    I see what health there is within her heart.
    Why fret my soul with this and that? why question
    If, after swearing deathless love to me,
    In such or such a way she made the breach?
    Granted that she were pure, granted Soemus
    Made her his head away--I cannot think it
    But grant ’twere so--that Joseph did the same,
    Was it my cue, before her spite’s stiff neck,
    To sink my own, and like a milksop let her
    Twist her to sheer negation of her soul?
    Oh nay, Oh nay! I swear it by the key
    Of Paradise that she holds in her hands.
    By all beatitude that she erewhile
    Has granted me, that she can grant me still,
    I lash what she became, not what she did.
    You eye me doubtfully, you think I reach
    Myself in her. I do it, oh I do it!
    If it may hap that men can die of wounds
    They give and not receive, then even now
    ’Twill come to pass--and yet to my content.

15. _Insert:_--

    And this is now the second time. Then hear--
    By your stark stubbornness, upon an earth
    Where all’s in flux, the only rigid thing;
    By every day of loveliness I lived
    With you to share, each day that now no more
    I dare remember; by my future, which
    Can never bring to me such days again;
    Yea, by the very shudder which were fain
    E’en now to choke this oath; this day, this hour
    I’ll have it out, whether my life is one
    With life of yours, and if it be that Nature
    In mock and gibe enknots me with a creature
    For ever--one to whom I’m naught, who can
    Avenge her thus, nay stand here as you do!
    Away! (_To_ THE JUDGES.) You halt? My sentence will no jot
    Admit retraction! (_Seeing they still hesitate._) Or have
          I missed the point?

16. _Insert:_--

    Since you are not for me nor yet against.




                            MARIA MAGDALENA




DRAMATIS PERSONÆ

    ANTHONY, _a joiner_.

    HIS WIFE.

    CLARA, _his Daughter_.

    KARL, _his Son_.

    LEONARD.

    A SECRETARY.

    WOLFRAM, _a Merchant_.

    ADAM, _a Bailiff_.

    SECOND BAILIFF.

    BOY.

    MAID.

SCENE: A town of moderate size.




MARIA MAGDALENA




ACT I

_Room in the master-joiner’s house._


SCENE 1

CLARA. _Her_ MOTHER.

CLARA.

    Your wedding-dress? Oh, how well it suits you! It might have been
    made to-day!

MOTHER.

    Yes, child, the fashion runs on, till it can’t get any further,
    and has to turn back. This dress has gone out of fashion ten
    times already, and has always come in again.

CLARA.

    But not quite, this time, mother. The sleeves are too wide. Don’t
    be cross with me now!

MOTHER (_smiling_).

    No, I should be _you_ if I were!

CLARA.

    And so that’s what you looked like! But surely you wore a
    garland, too?

MOTHER.

    I should think so! Why else do you suppose I tended the
    myrtle-bush in the flower-pot all these years?

CLARA.

    I’ve asked you so many times, and you would never put it on. You
    always said, “It’s not my wedding-dress now, it’s my shroud, and
    not to be played with.” I began at last to hate the sight of it,
    hanging all white there, because it made me think of your death
    and of the day when the old women would pull it over your head.
    What’ve you put it on for, to-day, then?

MOTHER.

    When you’re as ill as I’ve been, and don’t know whether you’ll
    get better or not, lots of things go round in your head. Death is
    more terrible than people think. Death is bitter-hard. He darkens
    the world, he blows out all the lights, one after another, that
    gleam so bright and gay all round us. The dear eyes of husband
    and children cease to shine, and it grows dim on every side. But
    death sets a light in the heart, and there it grows clear, and
    you can see lots--lots that you can’t bear to see.... I don’t
    know what wrong I’ve done. I’ve trodden God’s path, and worked in
    the house as well as I could. I’ve brought up your brother and
    you in the fear of the Lord, and eked out what your father earned
    with the sweat of his brow. And I always managed to have a penny
    to spare for the poor. If I did turn one away at times because I
    was cross-tempered, or because there were too many of them, it
    was no misfortune for him, for I was sure to call him back and
    give him double. But what’s all that worth! We tremble just the
    same, when the last hour threatens. We cringe like worms. We pray
    to God for our lives, like a servant asking his master to let him
    do a spoiled job over again, so as not to come short on pay-day.

CLARA.

    Do stop that, mother dear, it exhausts you.

MOTHER.

    Child, it does me good. Am I not strong and healthy again? Didn’t
    God simply call me to make me see that my garment was not yet
    spotless and pure, and didn’t He let me turn back at the mouth
    of the grave, and give me time to adorn myself for the heavenly
    bridal? He was not as lenient as that to those seven virgins in
    the Gospel that I made you read to me last night. That’s why I’ve
    put this dress on to-day, to go to holy communion in. I wore it
    on the day when I made my best and purest vows. Let it remind me
    of those I didn’t keep.

CLARA.

    You are talking just as you did in your illness!


SCENE 2

KARL (_enters_).

    Good-morning, mother. Now, Clara, how would you fancy me, suppose
    I weren’t your brother?

CLARA.

    A gold chain? Where’ve you got that?

KARL.

    What do I toil and sweat for? Why do I work two hours longer
    than the others every night? I like your cheek.

MOTHER.

    Quarrelling on a good Sunday morning? For shame, Karl.

KARL.

    Mother, haven’t you got a couple of shillings for me?

MOTHER.

    I’ve only got money for house-keeping.

KARL.

    Well, give me some of that. I won’t grumble if the pancakes are
    a bit thin for the next fortnight. You’ve done it many a time
    before. I know that. When you were saving up for Clara’s white
    dress, there was nothing tasty on the table for months. I closed
    my eyes to it, but I knew very well that a new hat or some
    show-piece was on the way. Let me have the benefit of it for a
    change.

MOTHER.

    You are impudent.

KARL.

    Well, I’ve no time now, or else----(_going_).

MOTHER.

    Where are you going?

KARL.

    I won’t tell you. Then you won’t need to blush when the old
    grizzly asks where I’ve gone. Tell him you don’t know. I don’t
    want your money either. It’s a good job there’s water in more
    wells than one. (_Aside._) They always think the worst of me at
    home, anyway. Why shouldn’t I keep them on the tremble, just for
    fun? Why should I tell them that I shall have to go to church
    now, unless somebody helps me out?


SCENE 3

CLARA.

    What does that mean?

MOTHER.

    Oh, he grieves me to the heart. Yes, your father’s right. That’s
    the outcome of it. When he was still a curly-headed boy, he used
    to ask so sweetly for his piece of sugar, and now he demands
    money of me just as insolently. I wonder whether he really
    wouldn’t want the money, if I had refused him the sugar. It
    worries me often. I don’t believe he even loves me. Did you ever
    once see him crying when I was sick?

CLARA.

    I saw very little of him; scarcely ever, except at meal times. He
    had a better appetite than I had!

MOTHER (_quickly_).

    That’s natural; his work is hard.

CLARA.

    Of course. Men are like that, too. They are more ashamed of
    their tears than of their sins. They don’t mind showing a
    clenched fist, but a weeping eye, no! Father’s just the same. The
    afternoon they opened your vein and no blood came, he was sobbing
    away at his bench. It went right through me. But when I went up
    to him and stroked him on the cheek, what do you think he said?
    “See if you can’t get this damned shaving out of my eye. There’s
    so much to do and I’m not getting on with it at all.”

MOTHER (_smiling_).

    Yes, yes.--I never see Leonard now. How is that?

CLARA.

    Let him stay away.

MOTHER.

    I hope you don’t see him anywhere except at home here.

CLARA.

    Do I stay too long when I go to the well at night, that you start
    suspecting me?

MOTHER.

    I don’t say that. But it was only to keep him from hanging about
    after you at nights in all weathers, that I let him come into the
    house at all. My mother wouldn’t allow that sort of thing, either.

CLARA.

    I never see him at all.

MOTHER.

    Have you been sulking with each other? I don’t dislike him. He’s
    so steady. If only he _was_ somebody! In my time he wouldn’t
    have had to wait long. The gentlefolk used to be as crazy after
    a good clerk, as a lame man after a crutch, for a good clerk was
    rare then. He was useful to small people like us, too. One day he
    would compose a New Year’s greeting from son to father, and would
    get as much for the gold lettering alone as would buy a child a
    doll. The next day the father would send for him, and have him
    read it aloud to him, secretly, with the door locked, lest he
    should be caught unawares, and show his ignorance. That meant
    double pay. Clerks were top-dog then, and raised the price of
    beer. But it’s different now. We old people, who can neither read
    nor write, are the laughing-stocks of nine-year-old boys. The
    world’s getting cleverer every day. Perhaps the time will come
    when we shall be ashamed if we can’t walk the tightrope.

CLARA.

    There goes the church bell.

MOTHER.

    Well, child, I will pray for you. And as for this Leonard of
    yours, love him as he loves God, neither more nor less. That’s
    what my old mother said to me when she was leaving this world,
    and giving me her blessing. I’ve kept it long enough and now I’ll
    pass it on to you.

CLARA (_giving her a bunch of flowers_).

    There!

MOTHER.

    I’m sure that came from Karl.

CLARA (_nods, then aside_).

    I wish it did! If anything is to give her real pleasure, it’s got
    to come from him.

MOTHER.

    Oh, he’s a good boy and loves his mother. (_Goes._)

CLARA (_looking after her through the window_).

    There she goes. Three times I dreamed she lay in her coffin, and
    now---- Oh these malicious dreams, they clothe themselves in
    our fears to terrify our hopes. I’ll never give heed to a dream
    again. I’ll never again take pleasure in a good one, and then
    I won’t have to worry about the evil one that follows it. How
    firm and sure is her step! She’s already near the churchyard.
    I wonder who’ll be the first to meet her--not that it matters,
    but----(_starting in terror_). The grave-digger! He has just dug
    a grave and is climbing out of it. She’s nodded to him, and is
    looking down into the dark hole with a smile. Now she’s thrown
    the flowers in, and is going into church. (_Music is heard._)
    They’re singing: “Now thank we all our God.” (_Folding her
    hands._) Yes! yes! If mother had died, I’d never have been happy
    again, for----(_looking towards heaven_). But Thou art gracious,
    Thou art merciful! I wish I had a faith like the Catholics, so
    that I could give Thee something. I would empty my money-box
    and buy Thee a lovely golden heart and wreathe it with roses.
    Our clergyman says that gifts are nothing in Thy eyes, for all
    is Thine, and we should not try to give Thee what Thou hast.
    But then, everything in the house belongs to father, and yet
    he’s pleased when I buy him a kerchief with his own money, and
    embroider it neatly and put it on his plate on his birthday.
    Yes, he honours me by wearing it on special holidays, Christmas
    or Whitsuntide. Once I saw a tiny little Catholic girl bringing
    her cherries to the altar. How I loved to see her! They were the
    first of the year, and I could see how she longed to eat them.
    But still she fought against her innocent desire, and threw them
    down quickly to make an end of temptation. The priest, saying
    Mass, had just raised the chalice, and looked frowningly at her,
    and the child hurried away terrified, but the Virgin over the
    altar smiled down so tenderly, as if she would have liked to step
    out of her frame, run after the child, and kiss her. I did it for
    her. There’s Leonard. Ah!


SCENE 4

LEONARD (_outside_).

    Are you dressed?

CLARA.

    Why so tender, so thoughtful? I’m not a princess.

LEONARD (_coming in_).

    I didn’t think you were alone. As I went past, I thought I saw
    Barbara from next-door at the window.

CLARA.

    That’s why, then, is it?

LEONARD.

    You are always cross. A fellow can stay away for a fortnight; it
    can have rained and shone again ten times over; but each time I
    see _you_, there’s always the same old cloud on your face.

CLARA.

    It used to be so different.

LEONARD.

    Yes, indeed! If you’d always looked as you do now, we’d never
    have been good friends.

CLARA.

    What does it matter?

LEONARD.

    Oh, you feel as free of me as that, do you? It suits me all
    right. So (_meaningly_) that toothache of yours the other day was
    a false alarm?

CLARA.

    Oh, Leonard, you’d no right to do it!

LEONARD.

    No right to bind what is dearest to me--yourself--by the last
    bond of all? And just when I stood in danger of losing it! Do
    you think I didn’t see you exchanging quiet glances with the
    secretary? That was a nice holiday for me! I take you to a dance
    and----

CLARA.

    You never stop worrying me. I looked at him, of course. Why
    should I deny it? but only because of the moustache he’s grown at
    college. It----(_she breaks off_).

LEONARD.

    Suits him so well, eh? That’s what you mean. Oh, you women! You
    like the mark of the soldier even in the silliest caricature.
    The little round-faced fop--I hate him! I don’t conceal it; he’s
    stood in my way with you long enough;--with that forest of hair
    in the middle of his face, he looks like a white rabbit trying to
    hide in a thicket.

CLARA.

    I haven’t praised him yet. You don’t need to start running him
    down.

LEONARD.

    You still seem to take a warm interest in him.

CLARA.

    We played together as children, and after that--you know all
    about it.

LEONARD.

    Oh yes, I know. That’s just the trouble.

CLARA.

    Well, surely it was natural for me, seeing him again for the
    first time after so long, to look at him and wonder at----

LEONARD.

    Why did you blush then, when he looked at you?

CLARA.

    I thought he was looking to see if the wart on my left cheek had
    got any bigger. You know I always think that when anybody stares
    at me, and it makes me blush. The wart seems to grow, whenever
    it’s looked at!

LEONARD.

    That may be. But it troubled me, and I said to myself: “I’ll test
    her this very night. If she really wants to be my wife, she knows
    that she’s running no risks. If she says No----”

CLARA.

    Oh, you spoke a wicked, wicked word, when I pushed you away,
    and jumped up from the seat. The moon that had shone, for my
    help, right into the arbour, wrapped herself cunningly in the
    wet clouds. I tried to hurry away, but something held me back.
    At first I thought it was you, but it was the rose-tree, whose
    thorns had caught my dress like teeth. You reviled me, until I
    could no longer trust my own heart. You stood before me, like one
    demanding a debt. And I----O God!

LEONARD.

    I can’t regret it. I know that it was the only way of keeping
    you. Your old love had opened its eyes and I could not close them
    fast enough.

CLARA.

    When I got home, I found my mother ill, dangerously ill. Smitten
    down suddenly, as if by an unseen hand. Father had wanted to
    send for me, but she wouldn’t let him, because of spoiling my
    pleasure. Imagine how I felt, when I heard that! I kept out of
    the way. I didn’t dare to touch her; I trembled. She thought
    it was just a child’s concern, and motioned me to go to her.
    When I went up to her slowly, she pulled me down and kissed my
    desecrated mouth. I gave way altogether, I wanted to confess
    to her. I wanted to tell her what I thought and felt: “_I’m_
    to blame for your lying there like that.” I did so, too, but
    tears and sobs choked my words; she took father’s hand and said,
    looking at me so happily--“What a tender heart!”

LEONARD.

    She’s well again now. I came to congratulate her, and--what do
    you think?

CLARA.

    And what?

LEONARD.

    To ask your father for your hand in marriage!

CLARA.

    Ah!

LEONARD.

    Isn’t that all right?

CLARA.

    Right? It would be the death of me, if I were not soon your wife.
    But you don’t know my father. He doesn’t know why we’re in a
    hurry. He can’t know, and we can’t tell him. And he’s told me a
    hundred times that he will only give me, as he puts it, to a man
    who has both love in his heart and bread in his cupboard. He will
    say, “Wait a year or two, my son,” and then what will you answer?

LEONARD.

    Why, you little silly, that difficulty’s all over. I’ve got the
    job, I’m cashier now.

CLARA.

    You’re cashier? And what about the other candidate, the parson’s
    nephew?

LEONARD.

    He came drunk into the exam., bowed to the stove instead of to
    the mayor, and knocked three cups off the table when he sat down.
    You know how hot-tempered the old boy is. “Sir!” he began, but he
    bit his lips and controlled himself, although his eyes flashed
    through his spectacles like two snakes ready to spring, and all
    his face was working. Then came the arithmetic and ha! ha! my
    opponent used a system of tables he had invented himself, and
    got quite original results. “He’s all astray,” said the mayor,
    and held out his hand to me with a glance that told me the job
    was mine. I put it reverently to my lips, although it stank of
    tobacco, and here’s the appointment, signed and sealed.

CLARA.

    That’s a----

LEONARD.

    Surprise, eh? Well, it’s not altogether an accident. Why do you
    think I never turned up here for a whole fortnight?

CLARA.

    How do I know. I should think because we quarrelled on that last
    Sunday.

LEONARD.

    I was cunning enough to bring that little quarrel about on
    purpose, so that I might stay away without causing you too much
    surprise.

CLARA.

    I don’t understand you.

LEONARD.

    I dare say not. I made use of the time in paying court to that
    little hump-backed niece of the mayor’s, who has so much weight
    with him. She’s his right hand, just as the bailiff’s his left.
    Don’t misunderstand me! I didn’t say pleasant things to her
    directly, except for a compliment on her hair, which is red, as
    you know. I only said a few things, that pleased her, about you.

CLARA.

    About me?

LEONARD.

    Yes, why should I keep it back? It was all done with the best
    intentions. You talk as if I had never been in earnest about you,
    as if---- Enough! That affair lasted till I’d got _this_ in my
    hand, and she’ll know which way I meant it, the credulous little
    man-mad fool, when she hears the banns read in church.

CLARA.

    Leonard!

LEONARD.

    Child! Child! Just you be as harmless as a dove, and I’ll be as
    wise as a serpent. Then we shall fulfil the words of the Gospel,
    for man and wife are but one. (_He laughs._) And it wasn’t
    altogether an accident either, that young Herrmann was drunk at
    the most important moment of his life. I’m sure you never heard
    that he went in for boozing!

CLARA.

    Not a word.

LEONARD.

    That made it all the easier. Three glasses did it. Two chums
    of mine went up to him and clapped him on the back. “Can
    we congratulate you?” “Not yet.” “Oh, but it’s all settled
    beforehand. Your uncle----” And then--“drink, pretty creature,
    drink!” When I was on my way here this morning, he was standing
    by the river looking gloomily over the parapet of the bridge. I
    grinned and nodded, and asked him whether he’d dropped anything
    into the water. “Yes,” said he, without looking up, “and perhaps
    it’s as well for me to jump in after it.”

CLARA.

    You wretch! Get out of my sight!

LEONARD.

    Yes? (_Pretending to go._)

CLARA.

    O my God, and I am chained to this man!

LEONARD.

    Don’t be childish. Just one word more in confidence. Has your
    father still got that two hundred pounds with the apothecary?

CLARA.

    I know nothing about it.

LEONARD.

    You know nothing about so important a matter?

CLARA.

    Here comes father.

LEONARD.

    You understand, the apothecary is supposed to be going bankrupt.
    That’s why I asked.

CLARA.

    I must go into the kitchen. (_Goes._)

LEONARD (_alone_).

    In that case there’s nothing to be got here. I can well believe
    it, for, if an extra letter happened to get on old Anthony’s
    gravestone by mistake, his ghost would walk till it was scratched
    out. That’s the sort of man he is. He’d think it dishonest to own
    more of the alphabet than was due to him.


SCENE 5

_Enter_ ANTHONY.

ANTHONY.

    Good morning, Mr. Cashier. (_Takes his hat off and puts on a
    woollen cap._) Will you allow an old man to keep his head covered?

LEONARD.

    You’ve heard, then----

ANTHONY.

    Heard last night. When I was on my way, in the evening, to
    measure the old miller for his last abode, I heard two good
    friends of yours railing against you. So I said to myself
    “Leonard, at any rate, hasn’t broken his neck!” I got particulars
    at the dead man’s house from the sexton, who had arrived there
    before me, to console the widow, and to get drunk at the same
    time.

LEONARD.

    And yet you let Clara wait till I told her?

ANTHONY.

    If you weren’t in a hurry to give her the pleasure, why should
    I be? I don’t light any candles in my house except my own. Then
    I know that nobody can come and blow them out, just when we’re
    enjoying them.

LEONARD.

    You surely don’t think that I----

ANTHONY.

    Think? About you? About anybody? I shape planks with my tools,
    I’ll admit, but never a man with my thoughts. I got over that
    sort of folly long ago. When I see a tree in leaf, I say to
    myself: It’ll soon be in bloom. And when it’s in bloom: Now it’ll
    bear fruit. I don’t get taken in there, so I stick to the old
    custom. But I think nothing about men, nothing at all, neither
    bad nor good. So that when they disappoint first my fears and
    then my hopes, I don’t need to go red and white in turn. I simply
    get knowledge and experience out of them, and I take the cue
    from my pair of eyes. They can’t think either, they just see. I
    thought I knew all about you already, but now you’re here again,
    I have to admit that I only half knew you.

LEONARD.

    Master Anthony, you’ve got it the wrong way about. A tree depends
    on wind and weather, but a man has rule and law inside of him.

ANTHONY.

    Do you think so? Ah, we old men owe a lot to death, for letting
    us knock about so long among you young fellows and giving us the
    chance to get educated. Once upon a time the world was foolish
    enough to believe that the father was there to educate the son.
    Now, it’s the other way. The son has to put the finishing touches
    on his father, lest the old simpleton should disgrace himself
    in the grave before the worms. Thank God, I’ve an excellent
    teacher in this boy, Karl, of mine; he wages ruthless war upon
    my prejudices, and doesn’t spoil the old fellow with too much
    indulgence. Only this morning, for instance, he’s taught me two
    new lessons. And very skilfully too, without so much as opening
    his mouth, without even showing himself; in fact, just by not
    doing so. In the first place, he has shown me that you don’t
    need to keep your word; secondly, that it’s unnecessary to go to
    church and freshen up your memory of God’s commandments. Last
    night he promised me he’d go, and I counted on it, for I thought,
    “He’ll surely want to thank the Creator for sparing his mother’s
    life.” But he wasn’t there, and I was quite comfortable in my
    pew, which indeed is a bit small for two. I wonder how he’d like
    it, if I were to act on this new lesson of his at once, and break
    my word to him? I promised him a new suit on his birthday, and so
    I have a good chance of seeing what pleasure he would take in a
    ready pupil. But--prejudice, prejudice! I shan’t do it.

LEONARD.

    Perhaps he wasn’t well----

ANTHONY.

    That may be. I only need to ask my wife. She’ll be sure to tell
    me he’s sick. She tells me the truth about everything on earth
    except that boy. And even if he isn’t sick--there you young
    men have the pull over us old folks again. You can do your
    devotions anywhere; you can say your prayers when you’re out
    bird-snaring, or taking a walk, or even in a public-house. “‘Our
    father, which art in Heaven’--Good-morning, Peter, coming to the
    dance to-night?--‘Hallowed be Thy Name’--Yes, you may smile,
    Katherine, but you’ll see--‘Thy will be done’--By God, I’m not
    shaved yet,”--and so on to the end, when you pronounce your
    own blessing, since you’re just as much a man as the parson,
    and there’s as much virtue in a blue coat as in a black. I’ve
    nothing against it. If you want to insert seven drinks between
    the seven petitions, what does it matter? I can’t prove to any
    one that beer and religion don’t go together. Perhaps it will get
    into the prayer-book some day, as a new way of taking communion.
    But I, old sinner that I am, am not strong enough to follow the
    fashion. I can’t catch devotion in the street, as if it were a
    cock-chafer. The twittering of sparrows and swallows cannot take
    the place of the organ for me. If my heart is to be uplifted,
    I must first hear the heavy iron church-doors clang behind me,
    and imagine they are the gates of the world. The high walls with
    their narrow windows, that only let the bright bold light of the
    world filter dimly through, must close in upon me, and in the
    distance I must see the dead-house with the walled-in skull.
    Well--better is better.

LEONARD.

    You take it too seriously.

ANTHONY.

    Without doubt. And I must admit as an honest man that it didn’t
    work to-day. I lost the mood for worship when I was in church,
    because of the empty seat beside me, and found it again outside,
    under the pear-tree in my garden. You are surprised? See, I was
    going home sad and depressed, like a man that’s had his harvest
    spoilt; for children are just like land, you sow good seeds and
    get tares in return. I stood still under the pear-tree, that the
    caterpillars have devoured. “Yes,” I thought, “my boy is like
    this tree, bare and empty.” Then I seemed to get thirsty, and
    felt as if I must go to the inn and have a drink. I was deceiving
    myself. It wasn’t beer that I wanted. I wanted to find my boy
    and rate him, and I knew for certain I should find him there. I
    was just going, when the wise old tree dropped a juicy pear at
    my feet, as if to say: Quench your thirst with that, and don’t
    insult me by comparing me with your knave of a son. I thought
    better of it, ate the pear and went home.

LEONARD.

    Do you know that the apothecary is going bankrupt?

ANTHONY.

    It doesn’t concern me.

LEONARD.

    Not at all?

ANTHONY.

    Yes, it does! I am a Christian, and the man has children.

LEONARD.

    He has more creditors than children. Children are creditors too,
    in a way.

ANTHONY.

    Lucky the man who has neither the one nor the other!

LEONARD.

    But I thought you yourself----

ANTHONY.

    That’s settled long ago.

LEONARD.

    You’re a cautious man. Of course, you called in your money--as
    soon as you saw that the old herbalist was going downhill.

ANTHONY.

    Yes, I’ve no need to tremble at losing what I lost long ago.

LEONARD.

    You’re joking.

ANTHONY.

    It’s a fact.

CLARA (_looking in_).

    Did you call, father?

ANTHONY.

    Are your ears burning already? We weren’t talking about you.

CLARA.

    The newspaper! (_Goes._)

LEONARD.

    You’re a philosopher.

ANTHONY.

    What does that mean?

LEONARD.

    You can control yourself.

ANTHONY.

    I sometimes wear a millstone round my neck instead of a collar.
    That has stiffened my backbone!

LEONARD.

    Let him who can do likewise!

ANTHONY.

    Whoever has so worthy a helper, as I appear to have in you, can
    surely dance under his burden. Why, you’ve gone quite pale!
    There’s sympathy for you!

LEONARD.

    I hope you don’t mistake me.

ANTHONY.

    Certainly not. (_Rapping on a cupboard._) Funny thing that you
    can’t see through wood, isn’t it?

LEONARD.

    I don’t understand you.

ANTHONY.

    How foolish grandfather Adam was to take Eve, although she
    was stark naked and didn’t even bring a fig-leaf with her. We
    two, you and I, would have whipped her out of paradise for a
    vagabond. Don’t you think so?

LEONARD.

    You are annoyed at your son. I came to ask for your daughter’s----

ANTHONY.

    Stop! Perhaps I might not say “No.”

LEONARD.

    I hope you won’t. And I’ll tell you what I think. Even the holy
    patriarchs did not despise their wives’ dowries. Jacob loved
    Rachel and courted her for seven years, but he was pleased,
    too, with the fat rams and ewes that he earned in her father’s
    service. It does him no disgrace, to my mind, and I don’t wish
    to shame him by doing better. I should like to have seen your
    daughter bring twenty pounds with her. Naturally. It would have
    been all the better for her, for when a girl brings her bed
    with her, she doesn’t need to start carding wool and spinning
    yarn. But she hasn’t got it, and what does it matter? We’ll take
    lenten soup for Sunday’s dinner, and feast on our Sunday joint at
    Christmas. We can manage that way.

ANTHONY (_shakes his hand_).

    You speak well, and the Lord approves your words. So I’ll try to
    forget that my daughter put a cup for you on the tea-table every
    evening, and you never came for a fortnight. And now that you’re
    going to be my son-in-law, I’ll tell you where my two hundred
    pounds have gone.

LEONARD (_aside_).

    So he has lost them. Well, I shan’t need to take any sauce from
    the old werewolf, when he’s my father-in-law.

ANTHONY.

    I had a hard time when I was young. I wasn’t born a prickly
    hedgehog any more than you were, but I’ve turned into one by
    degrees. At first all my prickles were turned inside and people
    for fun used to nip my smooth sensitive skin and laugh when I
    shrank back, because the points went into my heart and bowels.
    But that wouldn’t do for me. I turned my skin inside out and now
    the prickles get into their fingers, and I have peace.

LEONARD (_aside_).

    The devil’s own peace, I should think!

ANTHONY.

    My father never rested night and day, and worked himself into
    his grave when he was only thirty. My poor mother made a living,
    as best she could, with her spinning-wheel. I grew up without
    any schooling. When I got bigger and still could earn nothing, I
    should have liked at the least to go without eating. But if I did
    pretend to be sick at dinner-time and push my plate back, what
    was the good? My stomach was too much for me at supper-time, and
    I had to be well again. My greatest sorrow was my own clumsiness.
    I would quarrel with myself over it, as if I was to blame, as if
    I had provided myself in the womb with nothing but wolf’s teeth
    and deliberately left behind me every useful craft and quality.
    I was fit to blush when the sun shone on me. As soon as I was
    confirmed, the man they buried yesterday, old Master Gebhardt,
    came into our little room. He wrinkled his brow and twisted his
    face, as he always did when he had something good in his mind;
    then he said to my mother: “Have you brought this boy into the
    world to eat your head off?” I was just about to cut myself a
    slice of bread, but I felt so ashamed that I quickly put the
    loaf back in the cupboard. My mother was annoyed at his words.
    She stopped her wheel, and retorted hotly that her son was a
    good boy. “Well, we shall see,” replied old Gebhardt, “if he
    wants, he can come now, just as he stands, into my workshop. I
    want no apprentice money. He’ll get his food, and I’ll see to
    his clothes, too. And if he’s willing to get up early and go to
    bed late, he’ll get a chance now and then of earning a little
    money for his old mother.” Mother began to cry and I began to
    dance, and when at last we started to speak, the old man closed
    his ears and motioned to me to come. I didn’t need to put my
    hat on, because I hadn’t got one. I followed him without even
    saying good-bye to my mother, and when I got half-an-hour off
    on my first Sunday to go and see her, he sent her half a ham
    with me. God’s peace on his grave! I can still hear him, in that
    half-angry way of his: “By Gosh, under your coat with it, for
    fear my wife should see!”

LEONARD.

    You can weep, then?

ANTHONY (_wiping his eyes_).

    Yes, I hardly dare let myself think of that. However well the
    source of tears in me is stopped up, that opens it afresh every
    time. Well, it’s a good thing, too. If ever I get dropsy,
    there’ll be the less water to tap off. (_Changing his tone._)
    What do you think? If you went on a Sunday afternoon to smoke a
    pipe with the man you owed everything to, and found him all dazed
    and confused, with a knife in his hand, the very knife you had
    cut him his bread with hundreds of times, and bleeding at the
    throat and holding a cloth to the wound in terror----

LEONARD.

    Is _that_ how his end came?

ANTHONY.

    And if you came in time to save him and help him, not just by
    taking his knife from him and binding up his wound, but by giving
    him a dirty two hundred pounds you’d saved up, all in secret,
    because else he wouldn’t take it,--what would you do?

LEONARD.

    Being a free man without wife or child, I’d sacrifice the money.

ANTHONY.

    And if you had ten wives, like the Turks, and as many children
    as were promised to Father Abraham, and you had only a minute to
    decide in, you’d--well, anyway you’re going to be my son-in-law.
    Now you know where the money is. I can tell you to-day because
    my old master was buried yesterday. A month ago I’d have kept it
    to myself on my death-bed. I put the I O U under the dead man’s
    head before they nailed up his coffin. If I could write, I would
    have put “Honourably paid” at the bottom, but all I could do in
    my ignorance was to tear the paper lengthways. Now he’ll sleep in
    peace, and I hope I shall too, when I stretch myself some day by
    his side.


SCENE 6

MOTHER (_comes in quickly_).

    Do you know me still?

ANTHONY (_pointing to the wedding-dress_).

    The frame has kept well, but the picture’s gone a bit. There seem
    to have been a lot of spiders’ webs on it. Well, the time was
    long enough!

MOTHER.

    Haven’t I a frank husband? But I don’t need to praise him in
    particular. Frankness is the virtue of all husbands.

ANTHONY.

    Are you sorry that you had more gilt on you at twenty than at
    fifty?

MOTHER.

    Certainly not. If it weren’t so, I’d be ashamed of us both.

ANTHONY.

    Well there, give me a kiss. I have had a shave and I’m in a
    better temper than usual.

MOTHER.

    I’ll say “Yes” just to see if you still know how to kiss. It’s a
    long time since you thought of trying.

ANTHONY.

    Dear old mother. I won’t wish that you should close my eyes. It’s
    a hard task, and I’ll do it for you instead. I’ll do you that
    last service of love. But you must give me time, do you hear?
    Time to prepare and steel myself, and not make a mess of it. It’s
    far too soon yet.

MOTHER.

    Thank God, we are to be together a little longer.

ANTHONY.

    I hope so, indeed. Why, your cheeks are quite rosy again!

MOTHER.

    A queer little man, that new grave-digger. He was digging a
    grave, as I was going to church this morning. I asked him whom
    it was for. “For whom God will,” says he, “perhaps for myself. I
    might have the same experience as my grandfather. He once had got
    an extra grave ready, and that night when he was going home from
    the inn, he fell in and broke his neck.”

LEONARD (_who has been reading the paper all the time_).

    The fellow doesn’t belong to this town; he can tell us any lies
    he likes.

MOTHER.

    I asked him why he didn’t wait till there was an order for a
    grave. “I’m invited to a wedding to-day,” he said, “and I’m
    prophet enough to know that I shall feel it in my head to-morrow
    morning. Then somebody’s sure to have gone and died, just to
    spite me, and that would mean getting up early without finishing
    my sleep.”

ANTHONY.

    “You fathead,” I’d have said, “what if the grave doesn’t fit?”

MOTHER.

    That’s what I said. But he can shake out sharp answers as quick
    as the devil can shake out fleas. “I’ve made it to fit Weaver
    John,” says he, “he’s as big as King Saul, head and shoulders
    above everybody else. So anybody can come that likes--he won’t
    find his house too small for him. And if it’s too big, it’ll hurt
    no one but me. I’m an honourable man and won’t charge for an inch
    over the coffin-length.” I threw my flowers in, and said, “Now
    it’s occupied.”

ANTHONY.

    I think the fellow was only joking, but that’s bad enough.
    Digging graves in advance is like setting death-traps. The
    scoundrel ought to be sacked for it. (_To_ LEONARD, _who is
    reading_.) Any news? Is some kind creature looking for a poor
    widow who could do with a few pounds? Or is it the other way
    about, the widow looking for the friend that will give her them?

LEONARD.

    There’s news of a jewel-robbery. Funny thing! It shows that,
    although times are bad, there are still people among us that own
    jewels.

ANTHONY.

    A jewel-robbery! At whose house?

LEONARD.

    At Wolfram’s, the merchant’s.

ANTHONY.

    Wolfram’s--impossible! That’s where Karl went to polish a desk a
    few days ago.

LEONARD.

    They were stolen from the desk, right enough.

MOTHER (_to_ ANTHONY).

    May God forgive you for saying that!

ANTHONY.

    You’re right. It was a base thought.

MOTHER.

    I must say, that to your son you’re only half a father.

ANTHONY.

    We won’t talk about that to-day, wife.

MOTHER.

    Do you think he must be bad, just because he’s different from you?

ANTHONY.

    Where is he now? It’s long past dinner-time. I’ll wager the food
    is all boiled away or dried up, because Clara has secret orders
    not to set the table till he comes.

MOTHER.

    Where do you think he is? At most he’ll be playing skittles. He
    has to go to the farthest alley, so that you won’t find him, and
    then of course it takes him a long time to get back. I don’t know
    what you have against the game; it’s harmless enough.

ANTHONY.

    Against the game? I’ve nothing at all against it. Fine gentlemen
    must have their amusements. But for the kings of spades and
    diamonds, real kings would often find time heavy on their hands.
    And if there were no skittles--who knows?--dukes and princes
    might be rolling our heads about. But there’s no worse folly for
    a working man than to waste his hard-earned money on games. What
    a man has laboured for by the sweat of his brow, that he should
    honour and value highly, unless he wants to lose his balance
    altogether and grow to despise his honest work. How it hurts me
    to throw away a shilling! (_Door bell rings._)

MOTHER.

    There he comes.


SCENE 7

_Enter_ BAILIFF ADAM _and_ SECOND BAILIFF.

ADAM (_to_ ANTHONY).

    Now you may go and pay your bet. _People in red coats with blue
    facings_ (_with emphasis_) would never come, into _your_ house!
    Eh? Well, here you have two of us. (_To_ SECOND BAILIFF.) Why
    don’t you keep your hat on, as I do? Who’s going to stand on
    ceremony, when he’s among his equals?

ANTHONY.

    Equals, you cur?

ADAM.

    You’re right, we’re not among equals. Knaves and thieves are not
    our equals! (_Pointing to the cupboard._) Open that! And then
    three paces back! Don’t juggle anything out of it.

ANTHONY.

    What! What!

CLARA (_bringing cloth for dinner_).

    Should I---- (_stops_).

ADAM (_showing a paper_).

    Can you read writing?

ANTHONY.

    How should I, when my schoolmaster couldn’t?

ADAM.

    Well, listen! Your son has been stealing jewels. We’ve got the
    thief already. Now we are going to search the house.

MOTHER.

    Jesus!--(_falls down; dies_).

CLARA.

    Oh, mother, mother! Look at her eyes!

LEONARD.

    I’ll fetch a doctor.

ANTHONY.

    No need.--That’s the last face. I’ve seen it hundreds of times.
    Good-night, Teresa. You died when you heard it. That shall be put
    on your gravestone.

LEONARD.

    Perhaps I’d better----(_going_). How awful! But it’s a good thing
    for me. (_Goes out._)

ANTHONY (_takes out his keys and throws them on the floor_).

    There! Open up! Drawers and cupboards! Bring me an axe! I’ve lost
    the key of the chest. Oho! Knaves and thieves, eh! (_Pulls out
    his pockets._) I don’t find anything here!

SECOND BAILIFF.

    Master Anthony, compose yourself! Everybody knows you’re the
    honestest man in the town.

ANTHONY.

    Is that so? (_Laughing_). Yes, I’ve used up all the honesty there
    was in the family. Poor boy! There was none left for him. She,
    too--(_pointing to the dead body_)--was far too respectable. Who
    knows whether my daughter----(_Suddenly to_ CLARA.) What do you
    think, my innocent child?

CLARA.

    Oh, father!

SECOND BAILIFF (_to_ ADAM).

    Have you no sympathy?

ADAM.

    Sympathy? Am I feeling in the old man’s pockets? Am I making him
    take his socks off and turn up his boots? I meant to begin with
    that, for I hate him, as I never hated, since that affair at the
    inn, when he----You know the story and you’d have been insulted
    too, if you’d any self-respect in you. (_To_ CLARA.) Where’s your
    brother’s room?

CLARA (_pointing_).

    At the back. (BAILIFFS _go off_.) Father, he’s innocent! He must
    be! He’s your son, and he’s my brother!

ANTHONY.

    Innocent, when he’s murdered his mother? (_Laughs_).

GIRL (_with letter to_ CLARA).

    From Mr. Leonard. (_Goes out._)

ANTHONY.

    You don’t need to read it. He’s deserted you. (_Claps his
    hands._) Bravo, you rascal!

CLARA (_after reading_).

    My God, he has!

ANTHONY.

    Never mind him.

CLARA.

    But, father, I must!

ANTHONY.

    Must! Must! What do you mean? Are you----(BAILIFFS _return_).

ADAM (_maliciously_).

    Seek and ye shall find!

SECOND BAILIFF (_to_ ADAM).

    What are you thinking about? Was it true, then?

ADAM.

    Hold your jaw. (_Both go out._)

ANTHONY.

    He’s innocent, and you, you----

CLARA.

    Oh, father, you’re awful!

ANTHONY (_takes her by the hand, very gently_).

    My daughter, Karl is a bungler after all. He killed his mother,
    but what of that? His father’s left alive. You help him out!
    You can’t expect him to do it all by himself. You finish _me_
    off! The old tree looks pretty knotty yet, doesn’t it? But it’s
    shaking already. It won’t give you much trouble to fell it. You
    don’t need an axe. You’ve a pretty face. I’ve never praised
    you before, but let me tell you now, to give you courage and
    confidence. Your eyes and nose and mouth are sure to please; you
    turn into--you understand!--but it seems to me you’re that way
    already.

CLARA (_almost demented, flings herself with upraised arms at the dead
woman’s feet, and calls out like a child_).

    Oh, mother, mother!

ANTHONY.

    Take the hand of the dead and swear to me that you are as you
    should be.

CLARA.

    I--swear--that--I--will--never--bring--shame--upon--you.

ANTHONY.

    Good. (_Puts his hat on._) It’s a fine day. We’ll run the
    gauntlet, up street and down street. (_Goes out._)




ACT II


SCENE--SAME.


SCENE 1

ANTHONY _gets up from table_. CLARA _begins to clear away dishes_.

ANTHONY.

    Have you still no appetite?

CLARA.

    I’ve had enough, father.

ANTHONY.

    Enough of nothing!

CLARA.

    I had a bite in the kitchen.

ANTHONY.

    A poor appetite means a bad conscience. Well, we shall see. Or
    was there poison in the soup, as I dreamed last night, a bit of
    wild hemlock that was plucked with the other herbs by mistake?
    That would be a wise thing for you to do.

CLARA.

    Almighty God!

ANTHONY.

    Forgive me, I----To the devil with that pale, suffering look of
    yours, stolen from the Mother of Christ! Young people should
    look rosy. There’s only one man who has the right to parade a
    face like that, and he doesn’t do it. Ho! A box on the ears for
    every man that says “Uh” when he cuts his finger. Nobody has
    the right to now, for here’s a man that----Self-praise is no
    recommendation, but what did I do, when our neighbour was going
    to nail the lid on your mother’s coffin?

CLARA.

    You snatched the hammer from him and did it yourself, and said,
    “This is my masterpiece.” The choir-master, who was singing the
    funeral-hymn at the door with the choristers, thought you’d gone
    mad.

ANTHONY.

    Mad! (_Laughs._) Mad! Ay, ay, it’s a wise man that cuts his
    own throat when the time comes. Mine seems to be too tough, or
    else----A man lives in his corner of the world, and imagines he’s
    sitting by the fireside in a comfortable inn, when suddenly some
    one puts a light on the table, and behold, he’s in a robber’s
    den, and it goes bang! bang! on all sides. But no matter. Luckily
    my heart’s made of stone.

CLARA.

    So it is, father.

ANTHONY.

    What do you know about it? Do you think you have any right to
    join your curses to mine, because that clerk of yours left you
    in the lurch? Some one else will take you for a walk on Sunday
    afternoons, some one else will tell you that your cheeks are red
    and your eyes are blue, some one else will make you his wife, if
    you deserve it. But when you’ve borne your burden honourably for
    thirty years, without complaining, when you’ve patiently endured
    suffering and bereavement and all manner of misfortune, and then
    your son, who should be making a soft pillow for you in your old
    age, comes and heaps disgrace on you, till you feel like calling
    to the earth, “Swallow me, if you can stomach me, for I am more
    foul than you”--_then_ you may pour out all the curses that I am
    holding back; then you may tear your hair and beat your breast.
    That’s the privilege you shall have over me, since you’re a woman.

CLARA.

    Oh, Karl!

ANTHONY.

    I often wonder what I shall do when I see him again, when he
    comes in some evening before we’ve got the lamp lit, with his
    head shaved, prison-fashion, and stutters out “Good-evening” with
    his hand glued to the door-latch. I shall do something, I know,
    but what? (_Grinding his teeth._) And if they keep him ten years,
    he’ll find me still. I shall live till then, I know that. Mark
    you, Death! From now on I’m a stone to your scythe. Sooner shall
    it be shattered in your hands, than move me an inch.

CLARA (_taking his hand_).

    Father, do lie down for half an hour.

ANTHONY.

    To dream you are in child-bed, eh? And jump up and lay hold of
    you and then remember, and say I didn’t know what I was doing?
    Thank you, no. My sleep has dismissed its magician and hired a
    prophet instead, who shows me fearful things with his bloody
    fingers. I don’t know how it is. Anything seems possible to me
    now. Ugh! The future makes me shudder, like a glass of water seen
    through a microscope--is that right, Mr. Choir-master, you’ve
    spelt it for me often enough? I did that once at the fair in
    Nürnberg, and couldn’t take a drink the whole day after it. I
    saw our Karl last night with a pistol in his hand. When I looked
    at him more closely, he fired. I heard a cry, but I couldn’t see
    anything for smoke. When the smoke cleared, there was no split
    skull to be seen, but in the meantime my fine son had become a
    rich man. He was standing counting gold pieces from one hand
    into the other, and his face--devil take me if a man could look
    more placid, if he had slaved all day and just locked up his
    work-shop. We might look out for that. We might first sit in
    judgment, and then go ourselves before the greatest judge of all.

CLARA.

    Do calm yourself!

ANTHONY.

    Cure yourself, you mean. Why am I sick? Give me the healing
    draught, physician! Your brother is the worst of sons. You be
    the best of daughters. Here I stand before the world like a
    worthless bankrupt. I owed it a worthy man, to take the place
    of this invalid here, and I’ve pawned off a rogue on it. You
    be the woman your mother was. Then people will say: “It wasn’t
    the parents’ fault that the boy went wrong, for the daughter
    is going the right road and leads the way for others.” (_With
    fearful coldness._) And I’ll do my share. I’ll make it easier
    for you than the others. The moment I see people pointing their
    fingers at you,--I shall--(_passing his finger over his throat_)
    shave myself, and, this I’ll swear, I shall shave myself away
    altogether. You can say a fright did it--a horse ran away in
    the street, or the cat knocked a chair over, or a mouse ran up
    my legs. Those that know me will have their doubts, because I’m
    not particularly nervous, but what does it matter? I can’t go on
    living in a world where only sympathy keeps people from spitting
    when they see me.

CLARA.

    Merciful God, what shall I do?

ANTHONY.

    Nothing at all, my child. I’m too hard on you. I know it well.
    Nothing at all. Just stay as you are and it will be all right.
    I’ve suffered such injustice that I must practise it, or go
    under altogether, when it takes hold of me. I was crossing the
    road just now when Small-pox John came along, that vagabond I
    had locked up years ago, after he’d robbed me three times. There
    was a time when the wretch didn’t dare to look at me, but now he
    walks up coolly and holds out his hand. I wanted to box his ears,
    but thought better of it and didn’t even spit. Aren’t we cousins
    of a week’s standing? And isn’t it right for relations to greet
    one another? Our good man, the parson, came to see me yesterday,
    and said a man was responsible for nobody but himself, and it was
    unchristian arrogance in me to make myself answerable for my son,
    or else Adam would have to take it as much to heart as I. O God,
    I well believe that it doesn’t disturb the arch-father’s peace in
    paradise, when one of his great-great-grandchildren goes robbing
    and murdering, but didn’t he tear his hair over Cain? No, no, it
    is too much! At times I feel like looking to see if my shadow
    hasn’t gone blacker. I can bear anything, and I’ve proved it,
    anything but disgrace. Put as much weight round my neck as you
    like, but don’t cut through the nerve that holds me together.

CLARA.

    But, father, Karl hasn’t confessed to it yet, and they didn’t
    find anything on him.

ANTHONY.

    What do I care about that? I went round the town, and inquired
    about his debts in all the pubs. I found that he owed more than
    he’d have earned from me in a quarter-year, even if he’d worked
    three times as hard as he did. Now I know why he used to work two
    hours later at night than I did, and got up earlier, too. But he
    saw it was no good. It was too much trouble, or it took too long,
    so he seized the opportunity when it came.

CLARA.

    You always think the worst of Karl. You always did. Do you
    remember how----?

ANTHONY.

    You talk just like your mother. And I’ll answer you as I used to
    answer her--by saying nothing.

CLARA.

    And what if Karl gets off? What if they find the jewels again?

ANTHONY.

    Then I’d hire a lawyer, and I’d sell my last shirt to find
    out whether the mayor had the right to imprison the son of an
    honourable man, or not. If so, I’d submit, for if it can happen
    to anybody, I must put up with it, even though I had to pay a
    thousand times dearer than others. It was fate, and when God
    strikes me, I fold my hands and say: “O Lord, thou knowest why.”
    But if it was not so, if that man with the gold chain round
    his neck overstepped himself, because he couldn’t think of
    anything except that the merchant who lost the jewels was his
    brother-in-law, then we’d see whether there’s a hole in the law.
    The king knows full well that he must justly repay the obedience
    and loyalty of his subjects, and would wish least of all to be
    unfair to the smallest of them. We’ll see then whether he’ll
    stop the hole up for us. But this is all nonsense. It’s as easy
    for your mother to rise from her grave as for that boy to clear
    himself. I’ve had no comfort from him, and never shall have. So
    remember what _you_ owe me. Keep your word and then I won’t have
    to keep mine. (_Goes, and turns back._) I shan’t be home till
    late. I’m going to see the old wood-cutter in the hills. He’s the
    only man who looks me in the face as he used to, because he knows
    nothing yet of my shame. He’s deaf. They can’t tell him anything
    without shrieking themselves hoarse, and then he mixes it all up
    and never gets the truth of it. (_Goes out._)


SCENE 2

CLARA (_alone_).

    O God, O God, have mercy! Have mercy on this old man! Take me!
    It’s the only way to help him. Look! The sunshine lies so golden
    on the street that the children snatch at it. The birds fly
    about. Flowers and plants are never weary of growing. Everything
    lives and wants to live. Thousands of sick people tremble before
    thee at this hour, O Death! Those who called to thee in the
    oppression of the night, because their pain was more than they
    could bear, now once more find comfort in their beds. To thee I
    call! Spare him whose soul shrinks furthest from thee! Let him
    live until this lovely world again seems grey and desolate. Take
    me for him! I will not shudder at thy chilly hand. I will seize
    it bravely, and follow thee more gladly than ever any child of
    man has followed thee before.


SCENE 3

WOLFRAM (_enters_).

    Good morning, Miss Clara, isn’t your father at home?

CLARA.

    He’s just gone out.

WOLFRAM.

    I came to--my jewels have turned up!

CLARA.

    O father, if only you were here! There are his spectacles! He’s
    forgotten them. If only he’d notice it and come back! How did you
    find them? Where? At whose house?

WOLFRAM.

    My wife--Tell me frankly, Miss Clara, did you never hear anything
    strange about my wife?

CLARA.

    I did.

WOLFRAM.

    That she--(_tapping his forehead_). What?

CLARA.

    That she’s a bit wrong in the head? Yes.

WOLFRAM (_bursting into anger_).

    My God! My God! All in vain! I’ve never let a servant go, that
    I’ve once taken into my house. I’ve paid each one double wages
    and winked at all sorts of carelessness, to purchase their
    silence, and yet--Oh the false, ungrateful creatures! Oh my poor
    children! ’Twas for your sakes alone that I tried to conceal it.

CLARA.

    Don’t blame your servants. They’re innocent enough. Ever since
    that day the house next door was burned down, when your wife
    stood at the open window and laughed and clapped and puffed
    her cheeks and blew at the flames to fan them, people have had
    to choose between calling her a she-devil or a madwoman. And
    hundreds of people saw that.

WOLFRAM.

    That is true. Well, since the whole town knows my misfortune,
    it would be folly to ask you to keep it quiet. Listen to me,
    then. This theft, that your brother is in prison for, was due to
    insanity.

CLARA.

    Your own wife----

WOLFRAM.

    I’ve known for a long time that she, who once was the noblest and
    kindest of women, had turned malicious and spiteful. She rejoices
    when she sees an accident, if a maid breaks a glass or cuts her
    finger. But I only discovered to-day, when it was too late, that
    she steals things about the house, hides money, and destroys
    papers. I had lain down on the bed and was just dozing off, when
    I saw her come quietly up to me and stare at me to see if I was
    asleep. I closed my eyes tight, and then she took my keys out of
    my waistcoat, that I’d hung over the chair, opened the desk, took
    some money out, locked the desk again, and put the key back. I
    was horrified, but I controlled myself and kept quiet. She left
    the room and I went after her on tip-toe. She went right to the
    top of the house and threw the money into an old chest of my
    grandfather’s that stood empty there. Then she looked nervously
    about her on all sides, and hurried away without seeing me. I
    lit a candle and looked through the chest, and found there my
    youngest daughter’s doll, a pair of the maid’s slippers, an
    account book, some letters and unfortunately--or God be praised,
    which?--right at the bottom I found the jewels!

CLARA.

    Oh my poor mother! It is too shameful!

WOLFRAM.

    God knows, I’d sacrifice the trinkets if I could undo what’s
    done. But I’m not to blame. Much as I honour your father, it
    was natural for me to suspect your brother. He had polished the
    desk, and the jewels disappeared with him. I noticed it almost
    immediately, because I had to get some papers out of the very
    drawer they were in. But I had no intention of taking severe
    steps against him. I informed bailiff Adam, and asked him to
    investigate the matter secretly; but he would not hear of
    caution. He said it was his duty to report the case at once and
    he was going to do it. Your brother was a boozer and a borrower,
    and had so much weight with the mayor that he could get him to do
    anything he wanted. The man seems to be incensed against your
    father in the extreme. I don’t know why. I simply couldn’t calm
    him down. He stuffed his fingers in his ears and shouted as he
    ran, “If you’d made me a present of the jewels I wouldn’t be as
    pleased as I am now!”

CLARA.

    The bailiff once set his glass down beside father’s in the inn,
    and nodded to him to clink with him. Father pulled his away and
    said: “People in red coats with blue facings used once to have to
    drink out of wooden cans, and they used to have to stand outside
    at the window, or, if it rained, in the doorway; and they had to
    take their hats off, when the landlord served them, and if they
    wanted to clink with any one, they waited till old Fallmeister
    came along.” O God, O God! Anything can happen in this world!
    Mother paid for that with her death.

WOLFRAM.

    Offend no one, and bad men least of all. Where’s your father?

CLARA.

    Gone to see the wood-cutter in the hills.

WOLFRAM.

    I’ll ride out and look for him. I’ve already been at the mayor’s,
    but didn’t find him at home. If I had, your brother would have
    been here by this time. However, the secretary sent a messenger
    at once. You’ll see him before night. (_Goes out._)


SCENE 4

CLARA (_alone_).

    Now I ought to be glad. O God! And all I can think of is--“It’s
    only you now.” And yet I feel as if I’m bound to think of
    something soon that will put it all right again.


SCENE 5

SECRETARY (_entering_).

    Good-day.

CLARA (_grasping chair as if falling_).

    He! Oh, if only he hadn’t come back----

SEC.

    Your father’s not at home?

CLARA.

    No.

SEC.

    I’ve brought good news. Your brother, Miss--Oh, Clara, I can’t
    go on talking in this stiff way to you, with all the old tables
    and cupboards and chairs around me; my old acquaintances, that
    we played among when we were children. Good-day, you there!
    (_Nodding to a cupboard._) How are you? You haven’t changed.--I
    should think they’d put their heads together and laugh at me for
    a fool if I don’t call you “Clara” as I used to.[20] If you don’t
    like it, just think--“The poor chap’s dreaming, I’ll wake him
    up--I’ll go up to him and show him (_with a toss of head_) I’m
    not a little girl now”--that was your mark when you were eleven
    (_pointing to a mark on the door_)--“but a proper grown-up, that
    can reach the sugar when it’s put on the side-board.” Do you
    remember? That was the spot, that was the stronghold, safe from
    us, even when it stood unlocked. When the sugar was there, we
    used to play at catching flies, because we couldn’t bear to let
    them, flying about so merrily, get at what we couldn’t reach!

CLARA.

    I thought people forgot all those things when they had to study
    hundreds and thousands of books.

SEC.

    They do forget! I wonder what don’t people forget over Justinian
    and Gaius! Boys, that kick against the A B C so obstinately, know
    why they do it. They have a sort of feeling that, if they leave
    the spelling-book alone, they’ll never get at cross-purposes
    with the Bible. It’s disgraceful how they tempt the innocent
    souls with the red cock, and the basket of eggs, till they say
    A of their own accord--and then there’s no holding them! They
    tear down hill from A to Z, and on and on, till they are in the
    midst of _Corpus Juris_ and realise to their horror what a desert
    they’ve been enticed into by those curséd twenty-six letters,
    which they first used in their play to make tasty, sweet-scented
    words like “cherry” and “rose.”

CLARA.

    And what happens then? (_Absently without interest._)

SEC.

    That depends on temperament. Some work their way through, and
    come out again into the light of day after three or four years.
    They’re a bit thin and pale, but you can’t blame them for that.
    I belong to them. Others lie down in the middle of the wood.
    They only want to rest, but they very seldom get up again. One
    of my own friends has drunk his beer under the shade of the “Lex
    Julia” for three years. He chose the place on account of the
    name. It recalls pleasant memories. Others get desperate and
    turn back. They are the biggest fools of all, for they’re only
    allowed out of one thicket on condition that they plunge straight
    into another. And there are some there that never come to an end
    at all! (_Aside._) What stuff a fellow will talk, when he has
    something in his mind and can’t get it out!

CLARA.

    Everybody is merry and jolly to-day. It must be the fine weather.

SEC.

    Yes, in weather like this owls fall out of their nests, bats kill
    themselves, because they feel that the devil made them. The mole
    bores down into the earth till he loses his way and is stifled,
    unless he can eat through to the other side and come out in
    America! To-day every ear of corn puts out a double shoot, and
    every poppy goes twice as red as usual, if only for shame at not
    being so. Why should man remain behind? Is he to rob God of the
    one tribute that this world pays Him, a bright face and a clear
    eye, that reflects and glorifies all this splendour? Indeed,
    when I see these lazy-bones crawling out of their houses in the
    mornings with their brows all wrinkled, and glowering at heaven
    as if it were a sheet of blotting paper, I often think: “It’ll
    rain soon. God will have to let down His curtain of clouds; He’s
    bound to, so as not to be annoyed by such grimaces.” Such fellows
    ought to be prosecuted as thwarters of holidays and destroyers of
    harvests. How should you give thanks for life, except by living?
    Rejoice, bird! else you don’t deserve to have a throat!

CLARA.

    That is true, so true. It makes me want to cry.

SEC.

    I wasn’t saying it against you. I can understand your being
    a bit down this last week. I know your old man. But, God be
    praised, I can make you happy again and that’s what I’m here for.
    You’ll see your brother again to-night. People won’t point their
    fingers at him, but at those who threw him into prison. Does that
    earn me a kiss, a sisterly one, if it can’t be any other? Or
    should we play blind-man’s-buff for it? If I don’t catch you in
    ten minutes, I’ll go without and take a slap on the cheek into
    the bargain.

CLARA (_to herself_).

    I feel as if I’d suddenly grown a thousand years old and time
    had stopped still over my head. I can’t go back and I can’t go
    forward. Oh, this immovable sunshine and all the gaiety about me!

SEC.

    You don’t answer. Of course, I’d forgotten. You’re engaged. O
    girl, why did you do that by me? And yet, have I any right to
    complain? She is all that’s dear and good. All that’s dear and
    good should have reminded me of her. And yet for years she was as
    good as dead to me. In return she has----If only it were a _man_
    whom one could honour and respect! But this Leonard----

CLARA (_suddenly hearing the name_).

    I must go to him. That’s it! I’m no longer the sister of a thief!
    O God, what do I want? He will, he must! Unless he’s a very
    devil, all will be as it was. (_In horror._) As it was. (_To_
    SECRETARY.) Don’t be offended, Frederick.--What makes my legs so
    heavy all at once?

SEC.

    Are you going?

CLARA.

    To see Leonard, where else? I’ve only this one path to go in all
    the world.

SEC.

    You love him then?

CLARA (_excitedly_).

    Love him? It is him or death. Are you surprised that I choose
    him? I wouldn’t do it if I were thinking of myself alone.

SEC.

    Him or death? Why, girl, this sounds like despair.

CLARA.

    Don’t drive me mad. Don’t speak to me! You! I love you! There!
    There! I’ll shout it at you, as if I were already wandering
    beyond the grave, where no one blushes, where they all slink
    past one another, cold and naked, because that terrible, holy
    nearness of God has laid bare the thoughts of each one down to
    the roots.

SEC.

    Me? You still love me? Clara, I suspected it when I saw you
    outside in the garden.

CLARA.

    Did you? He did, too. (_Dully, as if alone._) He stood before
    me. He or I? Oh, my heart, my cursed heart! To prove to him and
    to myself that it wasn’t so, or to crush it if it were so, I did
    what I now----(_bursting into tears_). O God in Heaven, I would
    have pity if I were thou and thou wert I!

SEC.

    Clara, be my wife! I came to you to look you in the eyes in the
    old way. If you had not understood my look, I would have gone
    away and said nothing. Now I offer you all that I am and all that
    I have. It’s little, but it can grow. I’d have been here long
    ago, only your mother was ill--and then she died. (CLARA _laughs
    madly_.) Have courage, girl! You gave him your word. Is that on
    your mind? And I must say it’s a devil of a nuisance. How could
    you----?

CLARA.

    Oh! Go on asking me how things combine to drive a poor girl mad!
    Sneers and mockery on all sides when you had gone to college
    and never wrote. “She’s thinking about him.” “She thinks his
    fun was meant seriously.” “Does she get letters from him?” And
    then mother: “Stick to your equals.” “Pride goes before a fall.”
    “Leonard’s a fine young man; everybody is surprised that you turn
    your back on him.” And then my own heart: “If he’s forgotten you,
    show him that you too----” O God!

SEC.

    I am to blame, I know. Well, what’s hard is not therefore
    impossible. I’ll get you free. Perhaps----

CLARA.

    Get me free!--Read that! (_throwing him_ LEONARD’S _letter_).

SEC. (_reading_).

    As cashier--your brother--thief--very sorry--I have no choice
    in view of my office. (_To_ CLARA.) Did he write that the day
    your mother died? Why, he goes on to express his sympathy at her
    sudden death!

CLARA.

    Yes, he did.

SEC.

    May he be--Dear God, the cats and snakes and other monsters that
    slipped through your fingers at the creation pleased Beelzebub,
    so that he made them after you. But he decked them out better
    than you did. He gave them human form. Now they stand shoulder
    to shoulder with mankind, and we don’t recognise them till they
    begin to spit and scratch. (_To_ CLARA.) Very good! Excellent!
    (_Tries to embrace her._) Come! For eternity. With this kiss----

CLARA (_sinks into his arms_).

    No, not for ever. Don’t let me fall,--but no kiss.

SEC.

    Girl, you don’t love him, you’ve got your word back.

CLARA (_dully, drawing herself up again_).

    And yet I must go to him; I must go down on my knees to him and
    stutter: “Look at my father’s white hairs; take me!”

SEC.

    Unhappy one, do I understand?

CLARA.

    Yes!

SEC.

    That’s too much for any man. To have to lower one’s eyes before
    _him_--a fellow that’s only fit to be spat on. (_Pressing_ CLARA
    _to him_.) You poor, poor child!

CLARA.

    Go, now go!

SEC. (_to himself, broodingly_).

    Or shoot the dog dead that knows it. If he only had pluck! If
    he’d only show himself! Could I force him? I wouldn’t fear to
    meet him.

CLARA.

    I beg you----

SEC. (_going out_).

    After dark! (_Turns round and seizes_ CLARA’S _hand_.) Girl, here
    you stand--(_Turning away._) Thousands of her sex would have
    cunningly concealed it, only to murmur it into one’s ear in some
    hour of sweet forgetfulness. I feel what I owe you. (_Goes out._)


SCENE 6

CLARA (_alone_).

    Close, close, my heart! Crush in upon thyself. Let not a drop
    of blood escape, to fire anew the waning life in my veins.
    There again something like a hope arose in thee. I realise it
    now. I thought (_laughing_)--“That’s too much for any man.” And
    if--isn’t it too much for you? Would you have courage to seize a
    hand that----? No, no, you would not have such base courage. You
    would have to bolt yourself into your prison, if they tried to
    open the gate from without. For ever--Oh, why does it stop, why
    doesn’t it go on grinding for ever, why is there a pause now and
    then? That’s why it seems so long. The tortured one thinks he is
    having a rest because the torturer has to stop and take breath;
    you breathe again, like a drowning man in the waves, when the
    whirlpool that is sucking him down, throws him up again, only
    to lay hold of him afresh. All he gains from it is a redoubled
    death-struggle.

    “Well, Clara.” Yes, father, I’ll go, I’ll go! Your daughter
    won’t drive you to suicide. I shall soon be his wife, or--O God,
    no! I’m not begging for happiness, I’m begging for misery, the
    deepest misery--surely you’ll grant me my misery. Away!--where
    is the letter? (_Taking it._) There are three wells on the road
    to him. Let me stop at none of them. You have no right to, yet.
    (_Goes out._)




ACT III

LEONARD’S _Room_.


SCENE 1

LEONARD (_writing at a table covered with documents_).

    There’s the sixth sheet since dinner. How fine a man feels when
    he does his duty! Anybody could come into the room that liked,
    even the king himself--I would stand up, but I would not be
    embarrassed. Except for one man, that old joiner. But at bottom
    he can’t trouble me much. Poor Clara! I’m sorry for her. It
    disturbs me to think of her. If it hadn’t been for that one
    cursed evening. It was more jealousy than love that excited me,
    and I’m sure she only yielded to refute my reproaches, for she
    was as cold as death towards me. She has bad times ahead of her,
    and I shall have a lot of worry, too. Let each bear his lot.
    Above all things, I must make sure of that little humpbacked girl
    and not let her escape me when the storm breaks. Then I shall
    have the mayor on my side and need fear nothing.


SCENE 2

CLARA (_enters_).

    Good-evening, Leonard.

LEONARD.

    Clara? (_Aside._) I didn’t expect this. (_Aloud._) Didn’t you get
    my letter? Oh--perhaps your father’s sent you to pay the rates.
    How much is it? (_Turning leaves in a journal._) I ought to know
    it without looking it up.

CLARA.

    I’ve come to give you your letter back. Here it is. Read it again.

LEONARD (_reads it very seriously_).

    It’s quite a sensible letter. How can a man, who’s in charge of
    public money, marry into a family that--(_swallowing a word_)
    your brother belongs to?

CLARA.

    Leonard!

LEONARD.

    Perhaps the whole town’s wrong? Your brother isn’t in prison?
    Never been in prison? You’re not the sister of--of your brother?

CLARA.

    Leonard, I’m my father’s daughter. I don’t come as the sister of
    an innocent man whose name has already been cleared--that’s my
    brother;--nor as a girl who shudders at unmerited shame--for (_in
    a low voice_) I shudder more at you--I come in the name of the
    old man who gave me life.

LEONARD.

    What do you want?

CLARA.

    Can you ask? Oh, if only I were free to go! My father will cut
    his throat if I--marry me!

LEONARD.

    Your father----

CLARA.

    He has sworn it. Marry me!

LEONARD.

    Hand and throat are close cousins. They won’t damage one another.
    Don’t worry about that.

CLARA.

    He has sworn it.--Marry me, and then kill me--and I’ll thank you
    more for the one than the other.

LEONARD.

    Do you love me? Did your heart tell you to come? Am I the man
    without whom you can’t live or die?

CLARA.

    Answer that yourself.

LEONARD.

    Can you swear that you love me? That you love me as a girl should
    love the man who is to be bound to her for life?

CLARA.

    No, I can’t swear that. But this I can swear. That whether I love
    you or not, you shall never know. I’ll serve you, I’ll work for
    you. You don’t need to feed me. I’ll keep myself. I’ll sew and
    spin in the night-time for other people. I’ll go hungry if I’ve
    no work to do. I’ll eat my own flesh rather than go to my father
    and let him notice anything. If you strike me because your dog
    isn’t handy, or you’ve done away with him, I’ll swallow my own
    tongue rather than utter a sound that could let it out to the
    neighbours. I can’t promise you that my skin shall not show the
    marks of your lash, but I’ll lie about it, I’ll say that I ran my
    head against the cupboard or that the floor was too much polished
    and I slipped on it. I’ll do it before anybody has time to ask
    me where the blue marks came from. Marry me--I shan’t live long.
    And if it lasts too long for you, and you can’t afford to divorce
    me, buy some poison at the chemist’s and put it down as if it
    were for the rats. I’ll take it without even a sign from you, and
    when I’m dying I’ll tell the neighbours I thought it was crushed
    sugar.

LEONARD.

    Well, if you expect me to do all that, you won’t be surprised if
    I say no.

CLARA.

    May God, then, not look upon me too hardly, if I come before He
    calls me. If it meant only me, I’d bear it; take it patiently,
    as well-deserved punishment for I don’t know what, if people
    trampled on me in my misery, instead of helping me. I would love
    my child, even if it bore this man’s features. I would weep so
    before it’s helpless innocence, that it would not curse and
    despise its mother when it was older and wiser. But I’m not the
    only one. And when the judge asks me on the last day “Why did you
    kill yourself?” it will be an easier question to answer than “Why
    did you drive your father to it?”

LEONARD.

    You talk as if you were the first woman and the last. Thousands
    before you have gone through this and borne it. Thousands after
    you will get into your plight and accept their fate. Are they
    all so low, that you want to go away in a corner by yourself?
    They had fathers too, who invented heaps of new curses when they
    heard of it, and talked about death and murder. They were ashamed
    of themselves later on, and did penance for their curses and
    blasphemies. Why! they sat down and rocked the child, or fanned
    the flies off him!

CLARA.

    Oh, I can well believe that you don’t understand how anybody in
    the world should keep his oath!


SCENE 3

BOY (_enters_).

    I’ve brought some flowers. I haven’t to say who’s sent them.

LEONARD.

    Oh, what lovely flowers! (_Strikes his brow._) The devil! That’s
    stupid! _I_ should have sent some! How am I to get out of it?
    I don’t know much about these things, and the little girl will
    notice it; she has nothing else to think about. (_Takes the
    flowers._) But I won’t keep them all. (_To_ CLARA.) These mean
    remorse and shame, don’t they? Didn’t you once tell me that?

                                                          [CLARA _nods_.

LEONARD (_to the boy_).

    Look here, boy. These are for me. I put them here, you see, over
    my heart. These, red ones here, that burn like a glowing fire,
    you can take back. Do you understand? When my apples are ripe you
    can come again.

BOY.

    That’s a long time yet! (_Goes out._)


SCENE 4

LEONARD.

    Yes, Clara, you talked about keeping one’s word, and just because
    I _am_ a man of my word, I am compelled to answer as I do. I
    broke with you a week ago. You can’t deny it. There lies the
    letter. (_He passes the letter; she takes it mechanically._) I
    had good reason to; your brother--you say he’s been cleared.
    I’m glad to hear it. In the course of this week I have made
    promises elsewhere. I had a perfect right to, because you didn’t
    protest at the right time against my letter. In my own mind I
    was as free as before the law. Now you’ve come, but I’ve already
    given my word and taken somebody else’s, yes--(_aside_) I wish
    it were so!--she’s in the same condition as you.--I’m sorry for
    you--(_stroking back her hair_, CLARA _passive, as if she did not
    notice it_), but you’ll understand that the mayor is not to be
    trifled with.

CLARA (_absently_).

    Trifled with!

LEONARD.

    Now, you’re getting sensible. And as for your father, you can
    tell him straight to his face that he’s to blame for it all.
    Don’t stare at me like that, don’t shake your head; it is so,
    my girl, it is so! Just tell him so; he’ll understand and keep
    quiet, I’ll answer for it. (_Aside._) When a man gives away his
    daughter’s dowry, he needn’t be surprised if she’s left on the
    shelf. It puts my back up to think of it, and almost makes me
    wish the old boy was here to be lectured to. Why do I have to
    be cruel? Simply because he was a fool! Whatever happens, he’s
    responsible for it, that’s clear. (_To_ CLARA.) Would you like
    me to talk to him, myself? I’ll risk a black eye for your sake
    and go to him. He can be as rude as he likes, he can throw the
    boot-tree at me, but he’ll have to swallow the truth, in spite of
    the belly-ache it gives him, and leave you in peace. Be assured
    of that. Is he at home?

CLARA (_standing up straight_).

    Thank you. (_Going._)

LEONARD.

    Should I come across with you? I’m not afraid.

CLARA.

    I thank you as I would thank a snake that had entwined itself
    around me, and then left me of its own accord to follow other
    game. I know that I’ve been stung, and am only released because
    it doesn’t seem worth while to suck the bit of marrow out of
    my bones. But I thank you in spite of it, for now I shall have
    a quiet death. Yes, it is no mockery! I thank you. I feel as
    if I had seen through your heart into the abyss of hell, and
    whatever may be my lot in the terrors of eternity, I shall have
    no more to do with _you_, and that’s a comfort! And just as the
    unhappy creature bitten by a snake is not blamed for opening his
    veins in horror and disgust and letting his poisoned life well
    quickly away, so it may be that God of His grace will take pity
    on me when He sees you and what you’ve made of me.--If I had no
    _right_ ever to do such a thing, how should I be _able_ to do
    it?--One thing more: my father knows nothing of this, he doesn’t
    suspect, and in order that he may never know, I shall leave this
    world to-night. If I thought that _you_----(_Takes a step wildly
    towards him._) But that’s folly. Nothing could suit you better
    than to see them all stand and shake their heads and vainly ask
    why it happened!

LEONARD.

    Such things do happen. What’s to be done? Clara!

CLARA.

    Away, away! He can speak! (_Going._)

LEONARD.

    Do you think I believe you?

CLARA.

     No!

LEONARD.

    If you kill yourself, you kill your child, too.

CLARA.

    Rather both than kill my father! I know you can’t amend sin with
    sin. But what I do now, comes on my head alone. If I put the
    knife in his hand, it affects him as well as me. _I_ get it in
    any case. That gives me courage and strength in all my anguish.
    It’ll go well with you on this earth. (_Goes out._)


SCENE 5

LEONARD (_alone_).

    I must marry her! Yet why must I? She’s going to do a mad trick
    to keep her father from doing a mad trick. What need is there
    for me to stop her by doing a madder trick still? I can’t agree
    to it, not until I see the man before me who’ll anticipate me
    by doing the maddest trick of all, and if he thinks as I do,
    there’ll be no end to the business. That sounds quite clear,--and
    yet--I must go after her! There’s some one at the door. Thank
    God! Nothing’s worse than quarrelling with your own thoughts. A
    rebellion in your head, when you beget snake after snake and each
    one devours the other or bites off its tail, is the worst kind of
    all.


SCENE 6

SECRETARY (_enters_).

    Good-evening.

LEONARD.

    The secretary! To what do I owe the honour of----

SEC.

    You’ll soon see, my boy.[21]

LEONARD.

    You’re very familiar.[21] We _were_ at school together, of
    course----

SEC.

    And perhaps we shall die together. (_Producing pistols._) Do you
    know how to use these things?

LEONARD.

    I don’t understand you.

SEC. (_cocks one_).

    Do you see? That’s the way you do it. Then you aim at me, so, and
    fire.

LEONARD.

    What are you talking about?

SEC.

    One of us two has got to die. Die! At once!

LEONARD.

    Die?

SEC.

    You know why.

LEONARD.

    By God, I don’t.

SEC.

    Never mind. You’ll remember when you breathe your last.

LEONARD.

    I haven’t the faintest idea.

SEC.

    Now just come to your senses. Or else I might shoot you down for
    a mad dog that has bitten what is dearest to me, without knowing
    what I was doing;--as it is I’ve got to treat you as an equal for
    half an hour.

LEONARD.

    Don’t talk so loud. If any one heard you----

SEC.

    If any one could hear, you’d have called out long ago. Well?

LEONARD.

    If it’s on the girl’s account, I can marry her. I’d half made up
    my mind to, when she was here.

SEC.

    She’s been and gone again, without seeing you on your knees in
    remorse and contrition? Come! Come!

LEONARD.

    I beg you! I will do anything you wish. I’ll get engaged to her
    to-night.

SEC.

    Either I do that or nobody. And if the world depended on it, you
    shan’t touch the hem of her garment again. Come with me. Into
    the woods! Look here, I’ll take you by the arm and if you make
    so much as a sound on the road, I’ll----(_raising a pistol_).
    Believe me. Anyhow we’ll take the back way through the gardens,
    to keep you out of temptation.

LEONARD.

    One’s mine; give it me.

SEC.

    So that you can throw it away and force me to let you run away,
    or murder you, what? Have patience till we get to the spot, then
    I’ll divide squarely with you.

LEONARD (_accidentally knocks his glass off the table when going out_).

    Shall I never drink again?

SEC.

    Buck up, boy, you may come off all right. God and the devil are
    forever fighting for the world, it seems. Who knows which is
    master? (_Takes his arm; both go out._)


SCENE 7

_Room in_ ANTHONY’S _house_. _Evening._

KARL (_enters_).

    No one at home! If I didn’t know the rat-hole under the threshold
    where they keep the key, when they all go out, I wouldn’t have
    been able to get in. Well, that wouldn’t have mattered. I could
    run round the town twenty times and imagine there was no greater
    pleasure in the world than using your legs. Let’s have a light.
    (_Lights up._) The matches are just where they used to be, I’ll
    bet, because in this house we’ve got twice ten commandments.
    “Put your hat on the third nail, not the fourth.” “You must be
    sleepy at half-past nine.” “You’ve no right to be chilly before
    Martinmas and no right to sweat after it.” And that’s on a level
    with “Thou shalt fear God and love Him.” I’m thirsty. (_Calls._)
    Mother! Phew! I’d forgotten she’d gone where there’s no waiters
    to serve you. I didn’t blubber in that gloomy cell when I heard
    them ringing the bell for her; but--you red-coat! You didn’t let
    me have my last throw in the skittle-alley, although I’d the ball
    in my hand. I won’t give you time to breathe your last, when I
    find you by yourself. And that may be to-night. I know where to
    find you at ten o’clock. And then off to sea! What keeps Clara
    out? I’m as hungry as I’m thirsty. To-day’s Thursday. They’ve had
    veal broth. If it was winter, there’d have been cabbage; white
    cabbage up to Shrove Tuesday and green after. That’s as certain
    as that Thursday comes after Wednesday and that it can’t say to
    Friday, “Take my place, my feet are tired.”


SCENE 8

CLARA _enters_.

KARL.

    At last! You shouldn’t do so much kissing. Where four red lips
    get baked together, there’s a bridge for the devil to cross. What
    have you got there?

CLARA.

    Where? What?

KARL.

    Where? What? In your hand.

CLARA.

    Nothing.

KARL.

    Nothing! Is it secrets? (_Snatches_ LEONARD’S _letter from her_.)
    Give it to me! When your father’s out, your brother’s your
    guardian.

CLARA.

    I kept the thing in my hand, and yet the wind is so strong that
    it is blowing slates off the roofs. As I went past the church,
    one fell right at my feet. I nearly fell over it. “O God,” I
    thought, “one more”--and stood still. It would have been so
    beautiful. They’d have buried me and said it was an accident. But
    I hoped in vain for a second.

KARL (_who has read the letter_).

    Damnation! I’ll smash the arm of the man that wrote that. Fetch
    me a bottle of wine! Or is the money-box empty?

CLARA.

    There’s one bottle left in the house. I bought it secretly
    and hid it for mother’s birthday. It was to have been
    to-morrow----(_Turns away._)

KARL.

    Give it to me.

                                               [CLARA _brings the wine_.

KARL (_drinking quickly_).

    Now we might begin again--planing, sawing, and hammering, and
    then eating, drinking, and sleeping between-whiles to be able to
    go on planing and sawing and hammering. And a-bending of the knee
    on Sundays into the bargain: O God, I thank Thee for letting me
    plane and saw and hammer! (_Drinks._) Long live every dog that
    doesn’t bite on the chain! (_Drinks again._) Here’s to him again!

CLARA.

    Karl, don’t drink so much. Father says there’s the devil in wine.

KARL.

    And the parson says there’s God in it. (_Drinks._) We’ll see
    who’s right. The bailiff came here. How did he behave?

CLARA.

    He behaved as if he were in a thieves’ den. Mother fell down and
    died the moment he opened his mouth.

KARL.

    Good! If you hear in the morning that he’s been found dead, don’t
    curse the murderer.

CLARA.

    But, Karl, you won’t----

KARL.

    I’m not the only enemy he’s got. He’s been attacked many a time.
    It would be no easy matter to spot the right man, unless he
    leaves his hat or his stick lying. (_Drinks._) Whoever he is, I
    wish him luck.

CLARA.

    You’re talking----

KARL.

    Don’t you like the idea? Leave it alone, then. You won’t see me
    for a long time again.

CLARA (_shuddering_).

    No.

KARL.

    No! Do you know already that I’m going to sea? Do my thoughts
    crawl on my forehead for you to read them? Or has the old man
    been raving in his usual fashion and threatening to lock me out?
    Bah! That would be much the same as if the warder had said to
    me--“You can’t stay in prison any longer; I’ll throw you out
    where you’ll be free.”

CLARA.

    You don’t understand me.

KARL (_sings_).

    “The good ship puffs its sails, oh,
    And merrily blows the breeze.”

    Yes, truly, I’m not bound to the joiner’s bench any longer.
    Mother’s dead. There’s nobody now who would stop eating fish
    after every storm. Besides, I’ve wanted it ever since I was a
    boy. Out into the world! I shall never get on here, or not until
    I have it proved to me that Fortune no longer favours the man
    that boldly risks his life, the man that throws away the copper
    he gets from the great treasury, to see whether she’ll take it
    from him, or give it back to him gilded.

CLARA.

    And will you leave father alone? He’s sixty now.

KARL.

    Alone? Aren’t you staying with him?

CLARA.

    I?

KARL.

    Yes, you, his favourite! What nonsense have you got in your
    head that you ask such questions? I don’t begrudge him his
    pleasure. He’ll be freed from his eternal worry, when I go. So
    why shouldn’t I? We simply don’t suit each other. Things can’t be
    too narrow for him. He’d like to clench his fist and creep inside
    of it. I’d like to burst my skin like baby’s clothes, if I could!
    (_Sings._)

        “The anchor’s lightly lifted,
        The rudder’s quickly shifted,
        Away she flies with ease.”

    Tell me now, did he doubt my guilt for a moment? Didn’t he
    comfort himself as usual with his overwise: “I expected it. I
    always thought as much. It had to come to that.” If _you’d_ done
    it, he’d have killed himself. I’d like to see him if you went the
    woman’s way. He’d feel as if he was with child himself,--with the
    devil, too.

CLARA.

    Oh, how that tears my heart! I must go!

KARL.

    What do you mean?

CLARA.

    I must go into the kitchen--what else? (_Clutches at her brow._)
    Yes, that’s what I came home to do. (_Goes out._)

KARL.

    She seems very queer! (_Sings._)

        “There comes a daring seabird
        With greetings from the West.”

CLARA (_comes in again_).

    The last thing’s done now. Father’s evening jug is by the fire.
    When I closed the kitchen door behind me and realised I should
    never go in again, I shivered to the very soul. So shall I leave
    this room, so this house, and so the world.

KARL (_sings, walking up and down_. CLARA _in background_).

        “The sun it flames down daily
        And the little fishes gaily
        Do sport around their guest.”

CLARA.

    Why don’t I do it then? Shall I never do it? Shall I put it off
    from day to day? Just as I’m putting it off now, from minute to
    minute--yes, away then, away! And yet I stay here. I feel as if
    hands were raised in my womb, as if eyes----(_Sits down on a
    chair._) What does this mean? Am I too weak to do it? Well, am I
    strong enough to see my father with his throat cut? (_Standing
    up._) No! No!--Our Father, which art in Heaven--Hallowed be thy
    kingdom. O God, my poor head! I can’t even pray. Karl! Karl! Help
    me!

KARL.

    What’s wrong?

CLARA.

    The Lord’s Prayer. (_Recollects._) I felt as if I was in the
    water and sinking, and had forgotten to pray. I--(_Suddenly._)
    Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
    against us. That’s it. Yes! Yes! Of course I forgive him. I’d
    forgotten all about him. Good-night, Karl.

KARL.

    Are you going to bed so early? Good-night!

CLARA (_like a child, going through the Lord’s Prayer_).

    Forgive us----

KARL.

    You might get me a drink of water first--but it must be cold.

CLARA (_quickly_).

    I’ll fetch it from the well.

KARL.

    Well, if you like; it isn’t far.

CLARA.

    Thanks! Thanks! That was the only thing that troubled me. The
    deed itself was bound to betray me. Now they will say--“She’s had
    an accident. She fell in.”

KARL.

    Take care, though; they haven’t nailed that plank on yet.

CLARA.

    Why, the moon’s up! O God, I only come to save my father from
    coming. Forgive me as I--Be gracious, gracious---- (_Goes out._)


SCENE 9

KARL (_sings_).

        “I’d spring into it gladly,
        It’s where I’d live and die.”

    Yes, but first--(_Looking at clock._) What time is it? Nine.

        “I’m far from being hoary,
        And travelling’s my glory--
        But whither? What care I?”


SCENE 10

ANTHONY (_enters_).

    I owed you an apology for something, but if I excuse you for
    making debts secretly, and pay them for you into the bargain, I
    may be let off.

KARL.

    The one’s good and the other is unnecessary. If I sell my
    Sunday clothes I can satisfy the people myself, that want a few
    shillings from me. When I’m a sailor--(_aside_) there, it’s
    out!--I shan’t want them.

ANTHONY.

    What talk is this?

KARL.

    It’s not the first time you’ve heard it, but say what you like,
    my mind’s made up this time.

ANTHONY.

    Well, you’re old enough, that’s true.

KARL.

    Just because I’m old enough, I don’t crow about it. But to my
    mind, fish and fowl shouldn’t quarrel as to whether it’s better
    in the air or in the water. One thing more. Either you’ll never
    see me again, or you’ll clap me on the shoulder and tell me I did
    right.

ANTHONY.

    We’ll wait and see. I don’t need to pay off the man I’d engaged
    to do your work. What more is there in it?

KARL.

    Thank you!

ANTHONY.

    Tell me. Did the bailiff really take you right through the town
    to the mayor’s, instead of taking the shortest road?

KARL.

    Up street and down street, and over the market place, like a
    Shrove Tuesday ox. But take my word for it--I shall pay him out
    before I go.

ANTHONY.

    I can’t blame you, but I forbid you to do it.

KARL.

    Ho!

ANTHONY.

    I won’t let you out of my sight. If you tried to lay hands on
    him, I’d help the fellow myself.

KARL.

    I thought you, too, were fond of mother.

ANTHONY.

    I’ll prove that I was.


SCENE 11

SECRETARY (_comes in weak and tottering, pressing a scarf to his
breast_).

    Where’s Clara? Thank God I came here again. Where is she? (_Sinks
    into a chair._)

KARL.

    She went to--Why, isn’t she back yet? Her talk--I am afraid----
    (_Goes out._)

SEC.

    She is avenged. The wretch lies---- But I too---- Why, O God! Now
    I can’t----

ANTHONY.

    What’s wrong? What’s the matter with you?

SEC.

    It’ll soon be over. Don’t turn your daughter out. Give me your
    hand on it. Do you hear? Don’t turn her out, if she----

ANTHONY.

    This is strange talk. Why should I----? Oh, I’m beginning to see!
    Perhaps I wasn’t unjust to her?

SEC.

    Give me your hand on it.

ANTHONY.

    No! (_Puts both hands in his pockets._) But I’ll stand out of her
    way. She knows that. I’ve told her so.

SEC. (_in horror_).

    You have--unhappy man, now I begin to understand you!

KARL (_rushes in_).

    Father, father, there’s some one in the well! If only it isn’t----

ANTHONY.

    Bring the big ladder! Bring ropes and hooks! What are you
    tarrying for? Quick! Even if it’s the bailiff!

KARL.

    Everything’s there already. The neighbours were there before me.
    If only it isn’t Clara!

ANTHONY.

    Clara? (_Clutching at a table._)

KARL.

    She went to get some water, and they found her handkerchief.

SEC.

    Now I know why the bullet struck me. It is Clara.

ANTHONY.

    Go and see. (_Sits down._) I can’t. (KARL _goes out_.) And
    yet----(_Stands up again._) If I understand you properly (_to_
    SECRETARY) it’s quite right.

KARL (_comes back_).

    Clara’s dead. Her head’s all broken in by the edge of the well,
    when she---- Father, she didn’t fall in, she jumped in. A girl
    saw her.

ANTHONY.

    Let her think well before she speaks. It is too dark for her to
    have seen that for certain.

SEC.

    Do you doubt it? You’d like to, but you can’t. Just think of what
    you said to her. You sent her out on the road to death, and I,
    I’m to blame that she didn’t turn back. When you suspected her
    misfortune, you thought of the tongues that would hiss at it,
    but not of the worthlessness of the snakes that own them. You
    said things to her that drove her to despair. And I, instead
    of folding her in my arms, when she opened her heart to me
    in nameless terror, thought of the knave that might mock at
    me, and----I made myself dependent on a man who was _worse_
    than I, and I’m paying for it with my life. And you, too,
    though you stand there like a rock, you too will say some day,
    “Daughter, I wish you had not spared me the head-shakes and
    shoulder-shruggings of the Pharisees; it humiliates me more, that
    you are not here to sit by my deathbed and wipe the sweat of
    anguish from my brow.”

ANTHONY.

    She has spared me nothing. They saw her.

SEC.

    She did what she could. You were not worthy that she should
    succeed.

ANTHONY.

    Or she, perhaps! (_Noises without._)

KARL.

    They’re bringing her. (_Going._)

ANTHONY (_standing immovable till the end, calls him back_).

    Into the back room with her, where her mother lay.

SEC.

    I must go to meet her. (_Tries to get up and falls._) Oh, Karl!
    (KARL _helps him out_.)

ANTHONY.

    I don’t understand the world any more. (_Stands thinking._)




FOOTNOTES:

[1] He here imitates Rhodope’s voice, intimating that he has overheard
her reproof of Hero.

[2] _See_ note 1, p. 178.

[3] _See_ note 2, p. 179.

[4] _See_ note 3, p. 179.

[5] _See_ note 4, p. 179.

[6] _See_ note 5, p. 180.

[7] _See_ note 6, p. 180.

[8] _See_ note 7, p. 180.

[9] A mistake of Hebbel’s for Jael.

[10] These words are a sneer, being a repetition of the twice-repeated
phrase “_nicht so_.” Salome’s “_nicht so_?” means “not in that way?”
but Herod uses the same interrogative form in the sense of “_nicht
wahr_?” The familiar touch brings out the sneer.

[11] _See_ note 8, p. 180.

[12] _See_ note 9, p. 180.

[13] _See_ note 10, p. 181.

[14] _See_ note 11, p. 181.

[15] _See_ note 12, p. 181.

[16] _See_ note 13, p. 181.

[17] _See_ note 14, p. 182.

[18] _See_ note 15, p. 184.

[19] _See_ note 16, p. 184.

[20] _German:_ Ich muss “du” zu dir sagen.

[21] Using “du.”




Transcriber’s Note:

Variations in spelling, punctuation and hyphenation have been retained
except in obvious cases of typographical error. These corrections have
been made:

    Page 019: berühmtem --> berühmten
    Page 058: say --> saw
    Page 114: soo --> too
    Page 143: nithing --> nothing
    Page 201: erefor --> therefor
    Page 250: that’ --> that’s

Italics are represented thus, _italic_.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POETRY AND THE DRAMA ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact.

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
